HAWAII AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION
of the
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAll

BULLETIN No. 84

TARO VARIETIES IN
HAWAII
by
LEO D. WHITNEY, Assistant Agronomist

F. A. 1. BOWERS, Principal Agricultural Aide
M. TAKAHASHI, Junior Agronomist

CONTENTS
PAGE

5

Introduction
Historical Review

6

Botany

7

Present Investigation

9

Key to Taro Varieties

14

Descriptions of Classified Varieties

19

Descriptions of Unclassified Varieties

65

Appendix

71

Finding Lists

,

73

Illustrated Glossary of Botanical Terms

79

Glossary of Hawaiian Terms

81

Literature Cited

83

Index

85

4

5

INTRODUCTION
Taro, one of the oldest cultivated crops in the world, has long
been a staple food of the natives of all the Polynesian islands as
well as in the West Indies and the Orient. Since taro is propagated
almost exclusively by vegetative means, each locality has tended to
perpetuate its own forms, or "horticultural varieties."l Some of
these forms have remained localized; others have spread, and many
of them have been given new names. In the past, the valuation of
the various taros in Hawaii has been based on their quality as
cooked table taro or for making poi. A few are raised primarily for
their leaves, used for luau,2 and the old Hawaiians had varieties for
medicinal purposes and for offerings to the gods. The two types of
taro culture common in Hawaii have formed another basis for segre­
gating varieties: wetland varieties (submerged culture), all of which
are good for poi; and upland varieties (nonsuhmerged culture),
which are used primarily as table taro, only a few of them being
suitable for poi.
Within recent years, numerous scientific investigations (6, 10)3
have indicated the superiority of taro over other starchy crops (par­
ticularly polished rice) which are staple foods in the Pacific regions.
The emphasis on this fact by local physicians and nutritionists has
led to an increased demand for taro and a new interest in the cultiva­
tion of the crop. With commercial development, a need has arisen
for varieties particularly adapted to the production of taro flour,
beverage powders, and other dried taro products.
In addition, the problems involved in wetland culture-particu­
larly the menace of disease-and the necessity of extending plant­
ings by utilizing new lands have made important the selection of
varieties which will grow well in the moist, cool uplands.
Experiments have recently been conducted by this station on selec­
tion and development of desirable varieties through cross-pollination
(4, 7) as well as through natural vegetative mutation (4). Systematic
work along these lines must, however, be preceded by a classification
of the many varieties present in Hawaii. In 1914, MacCaughey and
Emerson (8) listed about 300 varietal names of taro in Hawaii,
1 The

term "variety" will be used througbout tbis bulletin to signify "horticultural

variety.u

• For do/inition of Hawaiian expressions (italic) used throughout this bulletin, see p. 81.
• Reference is made by number (italic) to Literature Cited, p. 83.

6

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experitl'tent Station

approximately half of which they estimated to be synonyms. The
confusion which has resulted from the large number of varieties and
synonymous names has made evident the 'need of a taxonomic key
for grouping and describing the taros in terms of their distinguishing
characters. The present study includes such a key, on the basis of
vegetative characters, and descriptions of the varieties which the
writers have been able to find in Hawaii, with all available information
as to origin, distribution, and use.
HISTORICAL REVIEW

Taro was mentioned in Chinese books as early as 100 B.C. It
was evidently thriving in Egypt at the beginning of the Christian
era, as Pliny (23-79 A.D.) refers to it as one of the established food
plants of the country. The accounts of the early European navi­
gators tell of the cultivation of this crop in Japan and the western
Pacific islands as far south as New Zealand. Taro has long been
intimately identified with the south Pacific islands, but nowhere has
it attained so much importance as in the Hawaiian group.
Like other food crops with wide distribution, the plant has been
known by various names in different parts of the world. European
botanists first knew it in Egypt under the name culcas, and it was
thought to have been introduced from India or Ceylon. In Ceylon the
wild plant is named gahala. The Malay names are kelady, tallies, or
laloes, from which may come the better-known Polynesian names­
tallo, tarro, or darro in Fiji, ta' 0 in the Marquesas, tala in Samoa, and
taro or kalo in Hawaii, Tahiti, the Cook Islands, and New Zealand.
The Philippine name is gam. The plant is known in various parts of
the West Indies as eddo, coco, and 11wlanga,o one of the East African
names is malombo,o the Japanese call it intO.
The numerous varieties found in Hawaii today seem conclusive
evidence that taro has been cultivated in these islands for many cen­
turies. When white men first came, in the latter part of the eight­
eenth century, taro was flourishing. As the "staff of life" of the
early Hawaiians, it was no doubt taken with them as they moved
from place to place. It is assumed that taro was brought by the
first Polynesians who migrated to Hawaii, and some ethnologists
feel that the study of this crop may yield interesting clues as to the
origin of the Hawaiian race. All through Hawaiian history is woven
the story of taro: to no other plant is so much native sentiment
attached.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

7

There are no authentic records as to the total acreage planted to
taro in the early Hawaiian period or even during the past century.
As one of the principal foods of an early population estimated at
300,000 (3), the crop must have covered many thousands of acres.
With the advent of other races, changes in modes of living, and the
rapid dwindling of the native population, taro plantings have so
decreased that the present estimate of commercial cultivation is only
about 1,200 acres (9).
In earlier days taro plantings in upland, nonirrigated areas were
probably as important as in the low-lying, irrigated valleys. In the
latter part of the last century, profound change took place in the
growing and processing of taro. Soon after the heavy influx of
immigrants from the Orient, the Chinese commercialized the mak­
ing of poi and, not long thereafter, took up the growing of taro to
a large extent. It was found that taro was weli adapted to the type
of submerged culture used by the Chinese for rice, and commercial
production became centered in low-lying, alluvial flats and small
valleys where the land could be diked and running water led into the
paddies.
There remain, however, small taro patches tended by the old
Ha~aiians. The favored locations are cool, moist uplands, where
the taro edges the fresh waters of a spring or is planted in patches
in very humid areas. In the commercial plantings only a few vari­
eties are cultivated, and almost the entire crop is used for poi. In the
upland patches are found many forms from the early Hawaiian
period, each serving a special purpose. The different poi taros, table
taros, luau taros (the leaves of which are used for greens), early- and
late-maturing and drought-resistant taros, medicinal taros, and taros
used for fishing and for various ceremonials are all represented.

BOTANY
Taro is a member of the Arum family, Araceae, which contains
about 100 genera and 1,500 species, most of which are subtropical
or tropical. They tend to be aquatic, but some are epiphytic. Among
the more familiar plants in this family are the calla lily, the anthurium,
and the ornamental caladiums.
Taro belongs to the genus Colocasia, a word which has been
connected through the Greek with the ancient Egyptian name of taro,
culcas. The scientific name of taro is Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott.

8

Bltlletl~1t 84} Hawa.ii Experil1tent Station

All of the numerous and diverse types of cultivated taros seem to be
varieties or forms of the one species.! The many forms of dasheens
are also included in this species, under the botanical variety globuli­
fcra; they have distinctive characteristics which set them apart from
the other taros. Following is a taxonomic description of taro:
Extremely variable, succulent, glabrous herb, 4 to 18 dm. tall. Stem a sub­
terranean corm with scaly outer bark and thin, usually highly colored cortex,
single or branching from the apex, with conspicuous leaf-scar rings, producing
cormels (aha) or rhizomes as offshoots. Petioles 4 to 18 dm. long, erect or
spreading, sheathing at base with sinus to about midway, uniformly light or dark
green to variously highly colored, striped, or flecked. Blades 25 to 85 cm. long,
20 to 60 cm. wide, usually peltate, ovate to more or less sagittate, the apex acu­
minate, a dark-colored spot known as pika on the upper surface at the point of
junction with petiole. Inflorescences 2 to 5 together in the leafaxils, the peduncles
15 to 50 cm. long, each spadix enclosed within a spathe. Spathes oblong-Ianceolate,
divided by a transverse constriction into two unequal parts, the lower part
3 to 5 cm. long, loosely or tightly convolute, more or less fleshy, tubular, the
upper part 15 to 35 cm. long, usually tightly but sometimes loosely convolute,
lanceolate. Spadix 6 to 14 cm. long, with female flowers at the base, consisting
of a few obovoid or ellipsoid ovaries 0.5 to 1.5 mm. in diameter, the stigma
sessile, capitate ; constricted above the female flowers and beset over a length of
2 to 5 cm. with light yellow sterile flowers; above the sterile flowers and over a
Icngth of 2 to 4 CIII. beset with male·f1owers ,consisting of 2 to 6 sessile anthers
which are fused into an obconical synandrium; with yellow constricted, obtuse
or acute sterile appendage at apex. Fruit a berry, 3 to 5 mm. across, ellipsoid.
Sced 1.2 to 1.5 mm. long, 0.7 to 1 mm. wide, hard, ovoid.

The taros are closely related to the yautias, or taniers (Xantho­
soma spp.), and the alocasias (Alocasia spp.), as well as to the
dasheens. In the literature dealing with the edible aroids, there has
been considerable confusion in the identification of these groups. As
far as the writers can determine, there is no apparent difference
between the taros and dasheens in morphology of the petioles and
blades. Except for the Pika taros, all forms of both have peltate
leaves. The corms of the dasheens can be stored for 2 to 6 1110nths
after harvesting without appreciable deterioration in quality whereas
the Polynesian taros almost invariably rot or become inedible within
1 Eight botanical varieties-nearly all of them considered as distinct species at times in
the past--of Colocasia escu/cnta, besides the variety typica, have recently been published (5).
They arc as follows:
var. ny",phaeifolia (Vent.) A. F. Hill comb. nov.
var. globll/ifera (Eng!. & Krause) Young.
var. aquati/is Hasskar!.
var. acris (R. Dr.) A. F. Hill com". nov.
,·ar. antiquor ..", (Schott) Hubbard & Rehder.
var. eltcltlora (C. Koch & Sella) A. F. Hill com". nov.
var. fontanesii (Schott) A. F. Hill comb. nov.
var. illustris (Dull) A. F. Hill comb. nov.

Ta1'o Varieties in Hawaii

9

a month after harvesting. The corm texture of the two groups is
distinctly different: dasheens have crisp texture and are easy to
cut; the taros, on the other hand, have a somewhat tough, spongy
texture with numerous fibers. Corms of dasheens cannot be made
into poi; they bec~me mealy and flaky rather than viscous during
the poi-making process. Dasheens almost invariably produce greater
numbers of oha, and as 'many as six successive generations may be
found in a single mature hill 8 months old. In these respects, the three
Japanese taros growing in Hawaii (Alwdo, Tsurulloko, and Miyako)
and one variety of unknown origin (Iliuaua) more closely resemble
the dasheens than the native taros. Barrett (1) calls the dasheens
"tuberous-rooted taros, usually of dwarfish habit."
Yautias are differentiated from the dasheens and taros in several
respects. The yautias, in general, make ranker growth, the plants
are thicker-set, and the parent plants live longer than either the
taros or dasheens. The sinus between the basal lobes of the leaf is
always clearly cut to the petiole, as in the Piko group of taros, and,
in the yautias, the primary veins of the basal lobes are exposed
dire"ctly to the sinus for a distance of about one-fourth to one-half
inch from the piko. The petioles of the yautias are nearly always
covered with a certain amount of bloom, while the taros and dasheens
are without this bloom. Except for two varieties (Tsurulloko and
Iliuaua) , the edges of the taro petiole are more or less convergent
along the groove or sinus except at the portion clasping the younger
petioles, while those of the yautias are distinctly divergent. The
starch grains of yautias are many times larger than those of taros
or dasheens.
PRESENT INVESTIGAnON
SOURCES OF MATERIALS

Collections of taro varieties in Hawaii have been made from
time to time by various individuals and institutions. Since mainte­
nance of taro involves considerable care, frequent replantings, and
changes in location to reduce losses by disease, nursery collections
have not been consistently maintained. With the waning in impor­
tance and diversity of uses of taro, nursery collections have de­
creased in size and number, and some of the rarer varieties have
gone out of existence. Others are to be found only occasionally,
usually as mixtures with the more common forms. The lesser-known

10

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

varieties are mostly in rem?te horne plantings of the old Hawaiians
or growing wild in the wooded uplands and moist valleys.
In the present investigation every known source of material was
used. Upland varieties were collected chiefly from the districts of
Kona, Puna, and Honokaa on the island of Hawaii, and Makawao,
Keanae, and Olowalu, on Maui. The commercial wetland areas,
principally on Oahu and Maui, were surveyed, and plants showing
distinct morphological differences were secured. Through the cour­
tesy of E. S. C. Handy of the Bishop Museum, a collection of 86
varieties was received in 1934-35. Twenty-five of these were new
additions to the station nursery; the remainder were either duplica­
tions or synonyms. Sixteen varieties of South Sea taros, collected
by G. P. Wilder during an extended exploration of that area in 1927,
were received in 1928. From all sources a little over 200 accessions
were made. This number was reduced to 84 distinct forms, including
69 native varieties, 10 from the South Seas, 3 Japanese, 1 Chinese,
and 1 of unknown but presumably Asiatic origin. Only 74 varieties
have persisted in the station collection until the completion of the
study.
Reference to the previously cited list of varieties compiled by
MacCaughey and Emerson makes evident the fact that many are
missing from the present collection. Accepting their estimate of
about 50 percent synonymy among the 300 varietal names listed, the
old Hawaiian recognized 150 to 175 distinguishable forms. Because
of vague, fragmentary, and often contradictory descriptions, it is
not always possible to determine when synonymy occurs in the list.
However, there is ample evidence that many varieties have become
extinct or at least do not exist in present collections or cultivated
areas. For example, the 25 group names listed were all recognized
by old Hawaiians; in the station collection, only 8 groups are found ..
Groups occurring in their list with as many as five varieties are now
represented by a single form-they list five forms of Piialii and
five of Apuwai whereas only one of each is now available. These were
important groups and the uses of the different forms were apparently
well known. In other groups, such as Ahe, Eulu, and Lau, none of the
varieties has been found.
With the development of a system of classification, further col­
lections and identifications will be greatly simplified, and a resurvey
of the areas already covered as well as long-abandoned sections may

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

11

disclose other varieties. The present collection, however, undoubt­
edly represents most if not all of the varieties now under active
cultivation.
MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTERS DESCRIBED

Before attempting to set up a system of classification, a careful
description was made of specimens of each variety grown at the
Pensacola Branch Station for from one to three generations. After
each harvest, those forms showing marked similarity were grouped
together, and in cases of suspected synonymy the forms were grown
side by side and carefully checked before eliminations were made.
The following data, when available, were taken on from 5 to 50
plants of each horticultural variety:
General characters: Height, position, rigidity, maturity, repro­
duction, and distinguishing characters.
Petiole: Length and coloring, including special markings through­
out, at the edge, the apex, and the base.
Leaf blade: Size, shape, texture, color, and special characteristics
of pika, veins, margins, lobes, and sinus.
"Corm: Color of flesh, fibers, and skin.
Inflorescence: Length, coloring, and shape of peduncle, spathe,
spadix, and sterile appendage.
A key has been prepared which classifies only the 74 varieties
which have persisted in the station collection. The 10 varieties
which have not been continuously propagated are described from
previously recorded data but, due to inability to check distinguish­
ing characters, are not classified.
Since many varieties of taro seldom, if ever, produce inflorescences,
the classification system is based on vegetative characters. Marked
changes occur in the plant during its growth, especially as regards
quantitative characters. The succeeding leaves and petioles increase
in size to a maximum which occurs about 6 months after planting;
from this stage to full maturity they decrease markedly. In addition,
the color and markings of petioles and of corm flesh, the develop­
ment of aha and rhizomes, and branching of corms depend upon
stage of maturity to some extent. Extremes of fertility, moisture,
and sunlight affect both quantitative and qualitative characters. It
is important that observations and measurements be made on plants
grown under normal conditions and not far removed from the period

12

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

of maximum top growth. Depending somewhat on growing condi­
tions and the variety of taro, this period would generally range
between 4 and 8 months of age. The taro plant is very succulent
and loses its turgor soon after being pulled. Observations should,
therefore, be made in the field as to open or upright position of
petioles, texture, surface characteristics, and position of leaf blades.
The key for the classification of taro is admittedly open to criti­
cism from many standpoints. In any vegetative key exact measure­
mcnts, although helpful, are not reliable; this is particularly true of
taro with its distinct cyclic growth. Color is, likewise, a somewhat
variable attribute, but by and large it is the most stable of the char­
acters used in the key. The characters used for subdivisions often
group varieties which have little else in common. Such imperfec­
tions in a system of classification are not limited to taro-they occur
with most plants in which a large number of forms or varieties have
developed through vegetative propagation. In this category may be
listed the sweetpotato, sugarcane, and banana.
Despite the obvious limitations, it is believed that the key as
worked out is a distinct advance over previous attempts to list and
describe large numbers of taro varieties with no grouping of related
varieties or elimination of synonyms.
SYSTEM OF NOMENCLATURE

The old Hawaiian was an unusually keen observer of nature.
He quickly noted small differences between plant forms, and there
are few species which have existed in Hawaii for any appreciable
length of time which do not have Hawaiian names. This is particu­
larly true with respect to varieties of taro. In general, the names
pertain to some obvious growth feature, a special use, or a specific
locality. That the Hawaiian recognized definite groupings of vari­
eties is also evident from the names.
In the system of classification herein used, it has been found
possible to maintain, to a large extent, the groupings used by the
Hawaiians. With few exceptions, the variety names have been re':'
tained, and from them considerable information can often be obtained
as to origin, use, or growth characters. Such groupings as Mana and
Pilw were based on very obvious and constant charactcrs which aid
materially in identifying the varieties.
In order to retain the Hawaiian nomenclature to the maximum

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

13

and at the same time make evident the grouping, the following system
has been adopted:
A single-word name indicates that the variety does not belong to a
recognized group; for example, Elepaio, Olle, and Akada.
A binomial name has been used where the variety is included in a
group, the first word being the group name and the seconu
generally a descriptive word. Thus, in Pilw Eleele, Pika indi­
cates that the variety belongs to the group having the sinus cut
to the piko; and Eleele is the descriptive name. Pikoele, being
a single name, indicates that the variety does not belong to the
Piko group.
'When a variety not belonging to any recognized group originally
had a double name, the two words were hyphenated to indicate
that the first was not a group name-as in KuJ1tu-eleele.
Occasionally a variety within a group had a three-word name. To
maintain the binomial system, the last two words were hyphen­
ated-as in Lauloa Palakea-keokeo.
In giving the names of varieties, it is customary to consiuer
priority of nomenclature, but this has not been possible in some
instances. Where synonymy has been definitely established for two
or more varietal names, the one in most general use was adopted and
the others were listed as synonyms. In a few cases, a group name
was placed before the common name to indicate that the variety
possessed the group attributes. The varieties introduced recently
from the South Seas were usually given the names of their places of
origin; for a few forms entirely new Hawaiian names have been
adopted.

14

KEY TO TARO VARIETIES
Parent corms small (usually less than 10 em. in diameter), producing
numerous oha (rarely less than 20) which seldom develop shoots
until the plants are mature (Japanese varieties).
b Petiole sinus divergent
1. Tsurunoko
bb Petiole sinus not divergent.
c Petioles greenish-bronze shading into reddish-purple at apex and
2. Akado
base
cc Petioles dark green, slightly diffused with reddish-brown at apex
3. Miyako
and near base, light pink at base
aa Parent corms not small, producing fewer oha.
b Parent corms large (usually over 15 em. in diameter) ; petiole sinus
conspicuously divergent
4. Iliuaua
bb Parent corms intermediate in size (usually from 10 to 15 cm. in
diameter) ; petiole sinus not divergent.
c Corms with conspicuous purple fibers in white flesh
S. Bun-long
cc Corms without purple fibers in white flesh (Polynesian varieties).
d Parent corms producing rhizomes.
e Rhizomes long (10 to 70 cm.), slender
6. Aweu
ee Rhizomes short (6 to 15 cm.), thick.
7. Kakakura-ula
dd Parent corms not producing rhizomes.
e Parent corms branching at apex (Group Mana).
f Corm flesh yellow.
g Petioles pink or reddish at base.
h Young petioles pink throughout, at maturity yellowish­
green except at base
8. Mana Ulu
hh P~tioles chiefly pale green, prominently flecked with
reddish-brown or purplish, especially near base
............................................................................9. Mana Opelu
gg Petioles white at base.
11 Petioles dark green with conspicuous, broad blackish
edges
10. Mana Weo
"" Petioles dark green with broad pinkish edges.. ll. Mana UUuli
f f Corm flesh whitish tinged with pink at apex or chalky white.
g Corm flesh whitish tinged with pink at apex; petioles
tinged or flecked with purple.
h Petioles flecked with purplish-red, almost lacking in
green
12. Mana Ulaula
"" Petioles dark green tinged with brownish-purple, dark
13. Mana Lauloa
brownish-purple on basal third
gg Corm flesh chalky white; petioles chiefly green.
h Petioles dark green with distinct pinkish-red edges
......................................................................14. Mana Keokeo
/all Petioles pale green, pink at edges
1S. Mana Kukuluhema
(J

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

15

ee Parent corms not branching at apex.

f Blades with sinus cut to the petioles; petioles with conspicuous ridge
above sinus (Group Pika).
g Corm flesh lilac-purple.

h Blades with outgrowths of dark, crinkled tissue on lower surface
..................................................................................16. Piko Lehua-apei
hh Blades without outgrowths of crinkled tissue
17. Piko Ulaula
gg Corm flesh whitish.
h Petioles light green, usually with dark green blotches adjacent
to edges.
i Petioles pink at base
18. Piko Kea
ii Petioles white at base
19. Piko Keokeo
hh Petioles dark green or reddish-brown to purplish.
i Petioles dark green.
j Petioles pink at base....................................•................... 20. Piko Uaua
j j Petioles white at base
21. Piko Uliuli
ii Petioles reddish-brown to purplish, especially on lower half
......................................................................................22. Piko Eleele
f f Blades not cut to the piko; petioles without conspicuous ridge above
smus.
g Blades distinctly variegated.
h Blades mottled over entire surface.
i Blades mottled green and white
23. Elepaio
ii Blades mottled green and purple
24. Uahiapele
hh Blades with purplish-black splotching around piko, running into
primary veins.
Petioles dark green with distinct whitish edges
2S. Manapiko
u Petioles yellowish-green with indistinct pinkish to whitish
26. Tahitian
edges
gg Blades not distinctly variegated.
h Blades concave and pendant, the margins with numerous fine
undulations; petioles slender, widely spreading (Group Kai)l
i Petioles diffused with light reddish-brown
27. Kai Uliuli
u Petioles light yellowish-green to whitish.
j Petioles white at base
28. Kai Ala
j j Petioles pink at base
29. Kai Kea
hh Blades and petioles not combining all of the above characters.
i Petioles short, usually less than one and one-half times the
width of the blades.
j Blades cup-shaped and crinkled.
k Blades conspicuously cup-shaped; piko noticeably de­
pressed
30. Apuwai
kk Blades only slightly cup-shaped.
1 The Kai group may readily be identified in the field, although it is difficult to evaluate
the distinguishing vegetative characters. Probably tbe slenderness of the petioles, which
causes them to curve perceptibly, and the pendant position of the leaf blades give the group
its characteristic appearance.

16

Bulletin 84, Hawa,ii Experiment Station
I Corm flesh white
II Corm flesh lilac-purple

31. Apu
32. Piialii

J J Blades crinkled but not cup-shaped.

k Petioles very dark green with distinct, narrow reddish edges 33. Paakai
. kk Petioles light green with inconspicuous, light greenish edges 34. Moana
11 Petioles not short, usually more than one and one-half times the width
of the blades.
J Petioles tall, usually more than three times the width of the blades.
Il Blades conspicuously concave; lobes overlapping
35. Akuugawai
I,ll Blades slightly concave; margins with a few large undulations
(Group LaItIoa).
Petioles purplish-black or dark green suffused with purplish­
black almost throughout.
111 Petioles purplish-black throughout.
n Petioles with greenish edges
36. Lauioa Eleele-omao
1111 Petioles with pinkish edges
37. Lauloa Eleele-uta
1II11l Petioles dark green heavily suffused with purplish-black.
n Petioles white at base.
o Petioles with blackish edges
38. Lauloa Palakea-eleele
00 Petioles with reddish-pink to almost whitish edges..........
............................................................39. Lauloa Palakea-ula
1111 Petioles pink at base
.40. Lauloa Palakea-papamu
II Petioles not purplish-black or heavily suffused with purplish­
black.
til Petioles dark green with needle-like black streaks
.
............................................................41. Lauloa Palakea-keokeo
1/l1ll Petioles medium green tinged with reddish-purple at apex....
............................................................................42. Lauloa Keokeo
j j Petioles intermediate in height, usually from two to two and one-half
times the width of the blades.
k Petioles highly colored over three-fourths their length.
I Petioles with blackish hue.
111 Corm flesh lilac-purple (Group Eleele).
Il Petioles with narrow reddish edges
.43. Eleele Makoko
1111 Petioles with narrow brownish to greenish edges
.
............................................................................44. Eleele Naioea
II1I1l Corm flesh white.
11 Petioles with inconspicuous yellowish-green to light pinkish
45. Manini-owali
stripes
nn Petioles without stripes.
o Petioles blackish almost throughout with indistinct edges
.......................................................................... 46. Kumu-eleele
00 Petioles purplish-black shading into yellowish-green at
apex, red at edges
,47. Nawao

:ig-. 2.-Types of leaf hlades-Upper left: Sag-ittatc leaf hlade of Malla/>i!.·{).
with narrow sinlls and splotched pilm; upper right: Narrowly sagittate leaf
hlade of Malia Ulillii; lower left: Broadly ovate leaf blade of Ilil/alla, with
shallow wide sinus; lower right: Ovate leaf blade of Uiallla KIUlHI.

l'ig. 2.-Types of leaf blades (continued)-Upper leit: Narrowly sagittate leai
blade of l,illIloa Palahl'a-papalllll. with a few large undulations; upper right:
Sagittate leaf blade of a yautia variety, with the characteristic Y -shaped
sinus; lower left: Sagittate leaf blade of I.chlla Mao/i .. lower right: Ovate
leaf blade of Pilw Ufill/i, with sinus cut to the pilw.

Ta.ro Varieties in Hawaii

17

II Petioles with reddish hue.
m Petioles pink at base (Group Ulaula).
Il Petioles brilliant light red
.4!!. Ulaula Kumu
1lI~ Petioles deeper red, with inconspicuous stripes.
a Petioles dark reddish-purple with lighter red stripes
.
....................................................................................49. Ulaula Poni
00 Petioles red to reddish-purple with yellowish-green stripes....
................................................................................50. Ulaula Moano
111m Petioles white at base
51. Niue-ulaula
H Petioles not highly colored over three-fourths their length.
l Petioles prominently striped or streaked.
111 Petioles with green and highly colored stripes or streaks.
n Petioles green with reddish-purple or purplish-black stripes.
a Corm flesh lilac-purple
52. Oopukai
00 Corm flesh white (Group M anini).
p Petioles dark green with broad purplish-black stripes,
especially near base
53. Manini Uliuli
pp Petioles light green with narrow stripes.
q Petioles with interrupted reddish-purple stripes, more
prominent toward base
54. Manini Kca
qq Petioles with profuse purplish-black stripes
.
..................................................................55. Manini Toretore
m~ Petioles streaked with pink or red and green on certain portions
only.
a Petioles dark green brilliantly streaked with red at apex and
at base
56. Papakolea-koae
00 Petioles nearly solid pink at base with narrow green stripes,
green above
57. Ula
111m Petioles with light and dark green stripes.
1~ Petioles conspicuously purplish-black at edges
S8. Nihopuu
1lI~ Petioles light pinkish at edges.
a Petioles strongly tinged with reddish-purple on upper third
................................................................................ 59. Manini-opelu
00 Petioles only slightly tinged with purple on upper half..60. Hinupuaa
II Petioles not prominently striped or streaked.
III Petioles colored over about half of length.
n Petioles dark green shaded with reddish-brown, purplish at
apex
61. Niue-uliuli
111I Petioles light green tinged with reddish-brown on lower half..62. Ohe
111m Petioles predominantly green.
n Corm flesh lilac-purple (Group Lehua).
a Petioles spreading, light green.
p Petioles with pinkish-lilac edges
63. Lehua Maoli
pp Petioles with broad purplish-black edges
64. LellUa Keokeo

18

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

Petioles erect, dark green.
p Petioles with narrow, dark reddish to purplish-black edges
.
.............................................................................................65. Lehua Eleele
pp Petioles with indistinct reddish to whitish edges
66. Lehua Palaii
,m Corm flesh white.
o Petioles pink at base.
p Petioles with flecking near base.
q Petioles flecked with light reddish-brown near base, greenish to
light purplish near apex
67. Apowale
qq Petioles with dark purplish tinge on lower third, with dark
reddish-brown flecks ncar base, reddish at point of attach­
ment to leaf blade
68. Wehiwa
pp Petioles without flecking.
q Petioles with distinct, broad whitish edges
69. Papapueo
qq Petioles with indistinct, narrow pink edges
70. Kuoho
00 Petioles white at base.
p Petioles with flecking near base.
q Petioles with yellowish-green blotches adjacent to narrow red­
71. Leo
dish edges
qq Petioles with conspicuous, broad whitish edges
12. Maea
f>P Petioles practically self-green.
q Petioles erect; blades ovate
73. Haokea
qq Petioles spreading; blades sagittate
74. Kalalau
00

19

DESCRIPTIONS OF CLASSIFIED
VARIETIES

20

21

DESCRIPTIONS OF CLASSIFIED VARIETIES

JAPANESE VARIETIES
The Japanese taros are probably of Asiatic origin, having been
introduced, presumably during the latter part of the last century, by
early immigrants from Japan. They are characterized by symmet­
rically ovoid corms which produce as many as 20 or more cormels,
or aha. The aha begin to develop early in the life of the mother plant,
several generations having developed by the time the plant is mature.
Except for a few of the oldest ones, the cormels remain dormant,
and these dormant cormels are marketed.
The Japanese taros differ markedly from the Polynesian taros,
more closely resembling the dasheens. They are generally more
hardy and disease-resistant, earlier maturing, and heavier yielding;
yields of 15 to 20 tons per acre of salable cormels in 6 to 10 months
are not unusual. They have better keeping qualities, remaining in
excellent condition after 2 or more months of storage. Japanese
taros are grown almost entirely under non submerged culture, but
they are usually irrigated. The dormant aha are used for planting
material whereas with the Polynesian varieties the huli are used almost
exclusively.
The Japanese varieties are not adapted to poi making but are
used almost entirely as table taro. The plant is usually less acrid l
than the Polynesian taros, and the petioles of the young leaves are
often cooked as a vegetable.
There are three Japanese varieties in the Territory.

1. Tsurunoko
(Aminto)
General characteristics: Short, spreading, moderately stocky, often maturing
within 6 months, producing as many as 40 olla, mostly dormant; distinguished
by light green petioles and divergent petiole sinus.
Petiole: 55 to 80 cm. long, light green with slight light brown flecking near base,
white to greenish-white at base, reddishApurple at apex, with inconspicuous
reddish edge; sinus widely divergent.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 cm. long, 25 to 40 cm. wide, 30 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate, firm-chartaceous, light green with bluish cast;
margins finely undulate, the marginal veins often purplish; piko yellowish
to light purple; lobes obtuse to slightly acute with shallow, wide sinus.
1 All parts of tbe taro plant contain small needle-like crystals of calcium oxalate which
cause irritation of the tbroat unless thoroughly cooked. They occur to a marked degree in
some varieties but to only a negligible extent in others.

22

Bulletin 84, Hawait: Experiment Station

Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white; cormels about 3 to 5 cm.
in diameter.
Origin, and derivation of name: Probably native of Japan; TSltnmoko refers
to the prolific production of aha.
Distribution: Most important Japanese variety in Hawaii, grown throughout
the islands, almost exclusively under upland culture by Japanese gardeners,
usually under irrigation alongside other vegetable crops.
Use: Mainly as table taro; to a certain extent for taro sprouts.
Remarks: Parent corms are discarded because of their pronounced acridity. The
aha are much smaller than those of the other Japanese varieties and are the
only ones which cause irritation. They are pared under water to prevent
itching hands. If the cormels develop top growth, they become acrid and
are discarded. The popularity of this variety is due primarily to the excellent
keeping quality.

2. Akado
(Ekaella)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, stiffly erect, stocky, maturing
within 10 months, producing more than 20 aha which remain dormant for
several weeks; outstanding among the Japanese taros because of the vivid
petiole coloring.
Petiole: 60 to 90 cm. long, greenish-bronze shading into dark reddish-purple at
base and apex, indistinctly edged, curved abruptly at apex so that blade
hangs more or less vertically.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, broadly ovate, firm-chartaceous, dark green with bluish cast, often
tinged with purple on lower surface when young, with conspicuous purple
veins on lower surface; pika prominent, purple; lobes acute with shallow,
wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin purple; aha usually 4 to 6 cm. in
diameter.
Origin, and derivation of name: Probably native of Japan; called A lwdo
because of coloring of petioles. Ekaeka, meaning "dirty reddish," is the
name given by the Hawaiians, probably also referring to the petiole coloring.
Distribution: Grown sparingly, almost entirely by Japanese gardeners in small
patches, usually under upland culture.
Use: Oha used principally as table taro; petiole stalks sometimes sold as greens;
sprouts from small aha grown in darkness sold in limited amount.
Remarks: The parent corms are edible but an aversion to them exists because
of their extreme acridity. This variety is highly resistant to disease. It has
the largest aha of the Japanese taros and probably has the best quality but
is grown only to a limited extent because of its comparatively poor keeping
quality.

3. Miyako
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, stiffly erect, moderately
stocky, maturing in less than 10 1110nths, producing more than 20 aha

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

23

which remain dormant for several weeks; distinguished by dark green
petioles diffused with reddish brown.
Petiole: 55 to 70 em. long, dark green slightly diffused with reddish-brown
near base and at apex, reddish-brown at edge, a pink ring at base with
paler pink for about 3 em. above, curved at apex so that blade hangs
almost vertically.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 em. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 30 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, firm-ehartaceous, dark green with bluish cast; pillO light
to dark purple; lobes wide and obtuse with shallow, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white; eormel about 4 to 6 em.
in diameter.
Origin, and derivation of name: Probably native of Japan; the derivation of
the name is unknown.
Distribution: Grown in limited amount throl1ghout islands, usually under
upland culture.
Use: Chiefly as table taro; stalks and sprouts excellent as greens.
Remarks: Similar in quality and texture to Akado.

4. Iliuaua
(Palu)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, well spreading, stocky,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 olza which may
remain dormant for several weeks; identified by exceedingly large leaf
blades, very thick and firm in texture, and conspicuously divergent petiole
sinus.
Petiole: 80 to 100 em. long, light green shading to yellowish on upper third,
usually brown or light reddish-purple at apcx, indistinctly reddish to
whitish at edge, a pink ring at base with lighter pink for 3 to 5 em. above;
sinus distinctly divergent.
Leaf blade: 65 to 80 em. long, 45 to 60 em. wide, 55 to 70 em. from tip to base
of sinus, broadly ovate, firm-chartaceous, drooping and often resting on
the ground, light green; margins somewhat undulate; piko yellowish;
veins brown or light reddish-purple on lower surface; lobes obtuse with
shallow, very wide sinus.
Corm: Very large, usually weighing over 2 pounds; flcsh white faintly tinged
with pink, especially near the apex, the fibers yellowish; skin pale pink.
Origin, and derivation of name: Unknown origin; it has been named lIillallo
because of the firm tough leaf blades. In Kona, Hawaii, it is somctimes
called Pake, which means "Chinese."
Distribution: Limited; well adapted to upland culture.
Use: Good table taro; the leaves are esteemed highly for luolt.
Remarks: It is an outstandingly high yielding variety and is very hardy but
because it cannot be made into poi, it is seldom grown. It is apparently
more closely related to the Japanese varieties than the Polynesian vari­
eties, especially as regards the corm characters.

24

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

5. Bun-long
(Bun-lang-woo, Chinese)
General characteristics: Tall, well spreading, stocky, maturing within 9 to
12 months, producing from 15 to 20 aha; identified by purple corm fibers.
conspicuous against whitish corm flesh.
Petiole: 75 to 110 em. long, dark green slightly tinged with reddish-purple
on upper half, conspicuously purple at apex, indistinctly reddish at edge,
usually an indistinct pinkish or purplish ring at base with white for 3 to
4 em. above.
Leaf blade: 50 to 60 em. long, 35 to 45 em. wide, 35 to 50 em. from tip to
base of sinus, ovate, drooping, dark green; margins slightly undulate;
pika large, purple; veins light purple on lower surface; lobes acute with
shallow, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with conspicuous purple fibers; skin cream-colored, occa­
sionally purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from China; the Chinese name
has been retained.
Distribution: Grown rather widely, primarily under wetland culture, but of
little commercial importance.
Use: At the present time a large part of the luau sold in the market comes
from this variety. The young leaves are considered desirable for lflall
because of their large size, tenderness, and comparative l1onacridity. The
corms are used as a table taro.
Remarks: This variety has the same corm coloring as Trinidad dasheen.

RHIZOME- PRODUCING TARO VARIETIES

There are two varieties in this category but, aside from the fact
that both produce rhizomes, they are apparently not related. The
rhizomes are short and thick in one variety' and long and slender in
the other, but in either case the aha are produced by the parent corm
at the end of uniform, horizontal, underground stems.
In the short-rhizome variety, the rhizomes are 1 to 1.5 cm. in
diameter and 6 to 15 cm. long; the long rhizomes are 15 to 70 cm.
long but only 0.3 to 0.5 cm. in diameter.
Commercially, these are the least important of all the taros.
They are planted in small areas in only a few localities, as the rhi­
zomes increase the difficulty of cultivation and harvesting without
damage to the parent corm or aha. The parent corms are also usually
smaller than in other Polynesian varieties.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

25

6. Aweu
(Aweo, Aweoweo, Aweuweu, J.1amauweo, Maauweo)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 10 to 15 long, slender
rhizomes; distinguished by length of rhizomes.
Petiole: 70 to 105 cm. long, light green often inconspicuously flecked with
dark green near base, white at base, with narrow, light purplish to
indistinct edge, curved sharply at apex so that blade hangs vertically.
Leaf blade: 40 to 65 cm. long, 25 to 45 em. wide, 35 to 55 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate, thin in texture, light green; margins slightly
undulate; pika greenish to faintly purple; lobes acute with shallow, narrow
sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, t1sually with
pink or purple along leaf-scar rings, the outer skin shaggy and flbrolls.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; derives its name frolll
shaggy outer skin of corm.
Distribution: Formerly widely distributed in wild state, now scattered along
streams and in forests in the mountains.
Use: Good as poi, but not used at present because the corms are usually
small; the leaves arc used for lllalt.
Remarks: This variety was used by the old Hawaiians for poi only when
other food was scarce. The corms are too acrid to be used as table taro
unless cooked for a long time. Aweu is often called wild taro because
of its frequent occurrence in the wild state. The rhizomes, sometimes as
long as 70 cm., come so close to the surface that they appear like
creeping stolons.

7. Kakakura-ula
(Kakakura)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing very early from 6 to 12 short,
thick rhizomes; distinguishable by brilliant reddish-purpl~ coloration
overlying light and dark green striping on petioles.
Petiole: 75 to 95 cm. long, dark and light green-striped with strong tinge of
reddish-purple almost obscuring stripes, indistinctly edged, white at
base, curved at apex so that blade hangs almost vertically.
Leaf biade: 45 to 60 cm. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 35 to 50 em. from tip to
base of sinus, sagittate, firm-chartaceous, dark green with bluish cast;
veins reddish on lower surface; pika purple; lobes acute with shallow,
wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored to white.
Inflorescence: Peduncle striped pink and light brown; spathe 24 to 32 em.
long, the lower tubular portion 4 to 5 cm. long, whitish, flecked or indis­
tinctly striped with pink and light brown, with reddish-purple margins,
the upper portion orange with reddish margins, abruptly acute at apex
but loosely convolute below, sometimes open near constriction at

26

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

maturity; spadix 9 to 11 cm. long, the sterile appendage 7 to 13 mm. long,
noticeably constricted, conspicuously acute.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from South Seas; since four
varieties were received under the name Kakakttra., the descriptive suffix
"ula" has been added to indicate a red Kakakl/.Ya..
Distribution: Limited; the variety has done well at Pensacola Street Sta­
tion under upland culture.
Use: Primarily as table taro.
Remarks: This variety is one of the most beautiful of atl the taros. The
predominating impression given by the plant is of the brilliant dark
pinkish-red color; on closer examination almost every color of the
rainbow may be found on the petiole. This taro might well be propa­
gated as an ornamental plant.

GROUP MANA

The word mana means "branching" and refers to the habit of divi­
sion of the parent corm, which is characteristic of this group. A single
parent conn of Mana Uliuli may produce seven or more mana., or
branches; the usual number for the other Mana is two or three.
Branching takes place with most varieties only when the corms are
fairly well matured; under some conditions of growth only a small
percentage of the plants produce branches. Probably because of the
branching habit, olza are produced sparingly and much later than in
other taros.
The petioles of the Mana are curved sharply at the apex, causing
the blade to hang almost vertically. The blades are very narrow,
and the primary veins are oblique, giving the impression that they
are much more numerous than in the other groups although actually
the number is practically the same in all taros. The coloring of the
pi/co is also rather unusual in that color splotching extends along the
midrib and the main veins of the basal lobes, forming a more or less
distinct Y. The Mana are usually quite upright in growth, with rather
stiffly erect petioles.
The corms of the Mana taros have a somewhat dry, mealy, flaky
texture when cooked. They are excellent as table taro but usually
make very poor poi. The shape of the corms is irregular because
of the branching. Most varieties are fairly heavy producers and
mature comparatively early, in from 7 to 12 months.
The M Gna are usually planted under upland culture. They are
grown fairly extensively on the island of Hawaii, especially in Kana,
Puna, and Kau. Mana Keokeo and MQ.11a Ulu are the two most
popular varieties in this group.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

27

The Mana group is one of the largest; eight varIetIes are repre­
sented in the station's plantings, and descriptions of at least two others
have been recorded. Commercially, the group is not important since it
is little used for poi, but it is probably the most popular taro for the
home gardens because of its excellent quality as table taro. The]"'1 alU/.
and the Lauloa taros are used in preference to all others for making
the Hawaiian pudding liulolo} a conlbination of grated taro and coconut
mille

8. Mana Ulu
(Mana Owene)
General characteristics: Medium in height, slender, erect, maturing within
7 to 12 months, producing two or three branches; distinguished by pinkish­
rose color of petioles.
Petiole: 50 to 85 cm. long, pink when young, changing to yellow-green except
near base, with narrow, indistinct, light pinkish edge.
Leaf blade: 30 to 50 cm. long, 20 to 30 cm. wide, 20 to 40 cm. from tip to
base of sinus, sagittate, vertical, firm-chartaceous, dark green or with
bluish cast; pilw pink or yellowish, the color extending into the main yeins
of the lobes; lobes acute with deep sinus.
Corm: Flesh yellow with light yellowish fibers; skin yellow.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; called Ulu because of the
resemblance of the flesh of the corm to the poi made from breadfruit.
Distribution: Found extensively under upland culture in Kona, Puna, and
Kau, Hawaii; does well under wetland culture on Kauai.
Use: Mainly as table taro.
Remarks: The orange-yellow flesh of the cooked taro IS much more
attractive than that of most varieties.

9. Mana Opelu
(Ala Pipika)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, matur­
ing within 7 to 12 months, producing two or three branches; distin­
guished by the yellow corm flesh and heavy reddish-brown flecking Oil
the lower portion of the petiole.
Petiole: 60 to 90 cm. long, pale green prominently flecked with reddish­
brown to purplish on the lower portion, with fairly distinct broad pinkish
edge, pale pink at base with white ring.
Leaf blade: 20 to 50 cm. long, 20 to 30 cm. wide, 20 to 40 cm. from tip to
base of sinus, sagittate, chartaceous, dark green or with bluish cast;
pika yellowish to reddish; lobes acute with deep sinus.
Corm: Flesh yellow with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, occasionally
purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; named after the fish, OPeltl,
because the Hawaiians used the corms as bait.

28

Bulletin 84, Hawa.ii Experiment Station

Distribution: Planted in a few scattered localities on Hawaii and Maui,
nearly always under upland culture.
Use: Sparingly as a table taro.
Remarks: According to the old Hawaiians, the fish bait was prepared by
cooking and pounding the taro until it could be broken in small pieces.
The pounded taro was placed in a small net bag and lowered into the
water directly above a large net, previously laid. The taro was released
from the bag by a sudden jerk of a cord, and as soon as the school of
Opelll was within the large net, the net ,vas hoisted to the surface.

10. Mana Weo
(WeD)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, slender, stiffly erect,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing two or three branches; dis­
tinguished from other Mana by conspicuous, dark purplish petiole edges.
Petiole: 75 to 105 cm. long, slender, dark green with conspicuous dark pur­
plish edge, particularly near base, white at base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 cm. long, 20 to 30 cm. wide, 25 to 40 cm. from tip to
base of sinus, narrowly sagittate, firm-chartaceous, medium green; pika
yellow; lobes acute with shallow, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh yellow with light yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, purple
along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from South Seas under the
name of Wea,. having been classed as a Alana, the group name was placed
before the common name.
Distribution: Limited; little is known as to its adaptability.
Use: A fair table taro.

11. Mana Uliuli
(Yellow)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, ma­
turing within 9 to 12 months; the most striking character is prolific
branching, as many as ten branches often being produced.
Petiole: 70 to 9S cm. long, olive-green tinged with reddish-brown and pink,
the latter pronounced near base, lilac-purple at apex, with a broad,
light pink to whitish edge, white at base with lilac-pink for 1 to 2 Clll.
above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 20 to 30 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. frolll tip to
base of sinus, vertical, firm-chartaceous, sagittate, dark green; pika yel­
lowish; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh yellow with light yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, dark
purple along leaf-scar rings.
Inflorescence: Produced rather profusely; peduncle light green flecked with
reddish-brown; spathe small, delicate, narrow, 12 to 16 cm. long, the
lower tubular portion 2 to 2.5 cm. long, light green, the upper portion
tightly rolled, light yellow; spadix rather delicate, 6 to 9 Clll. long, the
sterile appendage 4 to 8 mm. long.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

29

Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from South Seas under the
name "Yellow," which referred to the color of the corm flesh; it has
since been classified as a Mali-a taro and given the descriptive name Ulillli
because of the dark olive-green petioles.
Distribution: Limited; grown primarily under upland culture.
Use: Makes good poi of distinctly yellow color.
Remarks: Because of excessive branching, the shape of the corms is very
irregular. This is probably the only South Sea introduction desirable
for poi. The corms are similar to those of the Kai group, being tough and
rubbery when cooked.

12. Mana Ulaula
(Mana Ha Ulaula)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, slender, erect, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing two or three branches; readily identi­
fied by purplish-red flecking along the entire petiole, with almost com­
plete absence of green coloration.
Petiole: 70 to 90 cm. tall, slender, slightly curved at apex, flecked with
purplish-red, almost lacking in green, with narrow reddish edge, a dark
reddish-purple ring at base with lilac-pink for about 3 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 cm. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 35 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, thin in texture, light green; margins slightly undulate;
pika small, purple; veins purplish on lower surface of lobes; lobes acute
with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white tinged with pink, especially near apex, with yellowish
fibers; skin dark lilac-pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light purplish flecked with dark reddish-purple areas
at base and above constriction; spathe 14 to 17 cm. long, the lower
tubular portion about 3 cm. long, light purplish flecked with dark reddish­
purple at base and at constriction, the upper portion yellow, tightly rolled;
spadix 4 to 5 cm. long, slender, the sterile appendage 5 to 6 mm. long.
Origin and derivation of name: Native variety; Ulatt/a refers to purplish-red­
flecked petioles:
Distribution: Comparatively rare; planted in a few scattered localities on
Hawaii and Maui, nearly always under upland culture.
Use: Mainly as table taro for home use.

13. Mana Lauloa
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, stiffly erect, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing two or three branches; characterized by
large, somewhat ovate leaf blades and dark green petioles with dark
brownish-purple on lower portion.
Petiole: 80 to 90 cm. long, dark green tinged with brownish-purple, dark
brownish-purple on basal third, fairly broadly edged with pink to
whitish, a dark reddish-purple ring at base with lilac-pink-flecked area
for 1 to 3 em. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 50 cm. long, 35 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 45 cm. from tip to

30

Bulletin 84} Hawaii Experiment Station

base of sinus, ovate, thin in texture, medium green; margins undulate;
pika purplish; lobes obtuse, sometimes overlapping, with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pink apex and yellowish fibers; skin pinkish-lilac
to purple.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Lal/loa refers to large leaves.
Distribution: Limited; grown primarily under upland culture.
Use: Chiefly as table taro.

14. Mana Keokeo
(M a·lla Ken)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, maturing within 7 to 12
months, producing two or three branches; characterized by dark green
petioles with distinct pinkish-red edges.
Petiole: 60 to 85 cm. long, dark green, distinctly pinkish-red at edge, white
at base.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 cm. long, 20 to 40 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, thin in texture, medium green; margins undulate; pilw
small, yellowish; lobes obtuse, often overlapping, with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yellowish fibers; skin white, light lilac-pink
to purple at leaf scars.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Keokeo refers to white corm
flesh and white color at base of petiole.
Distribution: Grown extensively at Kana, Hawaii, almost exclusively under
upland culture.
Use: Mainly as table taro; one of the favorite varieties for making !mlolo.
Remarks: This is probably the most popular of the Malia, due to its large
corms and ability to produce good yields even under adverse conditions.

15. Mana Kukuluhema
(Ma1llla)
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing two or threc branches; di f­
ferentiated from Malia Keokeo by lighter petioles and whitish rather than
light lilac-pink or purple leaf-scar rings of corms.
Petiole: 50 to 70 cm. long, pale green, oftcn with light brownish fleckings
near base and along margins, pink at edge, purplish at apex, whilc at base.
Leaf blade: 40 to 45 cm. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 30 to 35 cm. frolll tip to base
of sinus, ovate, firm-chartaceous, medium green; margins slightly revo­
lute; pilw yellowish to light purple; lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with conspicuous ycllow fibers; skin white.
Inflorescence: Peduncle whitish; spathe 21 to 24 cm. long, the lower tubular
portion 3 to 4 cm. long, light green, the upper portion yellow, tightly
rolled; spadix 7 to 8 cm. long, the sterile appendage 4 to 5 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from Samoa under the name
1'.1alllla. Because of the close similari ty between 111alia and 1'.1all II a·, the
Hawaiian K uklllllhcma, meaning "south," has been substituted for AI a 1/.1 1(1..
Distribution: Very little known.
Use: A fair table taro.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

31

GROUP PIKO

The group Piko is comprised of seven varieties, in all of which the
sinus of the leaf blade is cut to the point of attachment to the petiole.
this point of juncture being called the piko, or navel, of the taro.
Another unusual feature. of the Pilw taros is the presence of a per­
sistent ridge on the inner surface of the petiole above its sinus. These
two characters are found only in this group and seem to be con­
sistently linked. The plants are medium in height, erect, and COlll­
pact in growth, with stiffly erect petioles and more or less horizontal
blades. The leaves are comparatively small and usually ovate in
shape. The group produces oha more freely than most other varieties.
This is the most natural grouping of the taros as all the memhers
exhibit close relationship. Most are rather late maturing, being
harvested usually about 12 to 15 or sometimes as long as 18 months
after planting. They are the hardiest group and, at the present time.
are the most common of the so-called wetland taros. They make
their best growth in the cooler sections of the islands with an abull­
dance of fresh cool mountain water for flooding the taro patches.
They are by all odds the most important of the commercial taros and
their popularity is steadily increasing, prohably due more to their
comparative resistance to root rot than to any other single factor.
All are known to make good poi. They are grown extensively
throughout the islands, but are especially popular on the island 0 r
Oah u. Pilw K ca and Piko Uliuli are the two most important varietie~
in this group.
16. Pika Lehua-apei
(L('!zuG Apei)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, ma­
turing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 oha; distinguished
from other Pika varieties by outgrowths of dark green crinkled tissue 011
lower surface of leaf blade.
Petiole: 60 to 95 cm. long, yellowish green with faint pinkish cast, usually
faintly red at edge, a pink ring at base with pale pink for 3 to 4 cm.
above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 60 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, tapering to a sharp point, concave, firm-chartaceous.
dark green with pinkish cast when young; margins decidedly undulate:
lobes acute with outgrowths of dark green crinkled tissues on lower
surface, the sinus deep and wide.
Corm: Flesh lilac-purple with light purple fibers; skin pink.

32

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; generally known as LeIma
Apei because of lilac corm flesh, but as the basal lobes are clearly cut to the
pilw it has been grouped with the Pika varieties and the name Pika Lelma­
apei has been adopted.
Distribution: Found occasionally in wetland patches with Pilw Kea and
Pika Ulillii.
Use: Popular for red poi, some of the so-called LeIma red poi being made from
this variety, especially on Oahu; the leaves are good for lllall.

17. Piko Ulaula
(Haehae Ulaula)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, matur­
ing within 12 to 15 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished
from Pika Lelwa-apei by lack of crinkled tissue on leaf blade and from
other Pilw varieties by the lilac-purple corm flesh.
Petiole: 75 to 100 cm. long, dark green with dark brown shading near base
and a narrow reddish-purple edge, a dark reddish-purple ring at base
with lighter reddish-purple-flecked area for 3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, chartaceous, dark green with bluish cast; lobes acute
with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh lilac-purple with dark lilac-purple fibers; skin dark lilac-pink.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Ulallla, meaning reddish,
refers to pink corms which make "red" poi.
Distribution: Apparently rare; has done well at Pensacola Branch Station
under upland culture.
Use: Makes red poi of good quality.

18. Piko Kea
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, matur­
ing within 15 to 18 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha,' distinguished by
light green petioles and pinkish base.
Petiole: 60 to 100 cm. long, light green, pinkish-red at edge, usually with
adjac'ent dark green blotches especially near base, a pink ring at base
with light pink for 3 to 4 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 30 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 20 to 35 cm. from base of
sinus to tip, ovate, nearly horizontal, light to dark green; pika whitish;
lobes narroYl and obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish apex and yellowish fibers; skin pale pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green; spathe 15 to 20 cm. long, the lower tubular
constricted portion 3 to 4.5 cm. long, green, usually tinged with red at
base, usually partially opened exposing ovaries, the upper portion deep
yellow; spadix 5 to 6 cm. long, the sterile appendage about 4 111111. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Kea refers to the light
green coloring of the petioles.

Fig. 4.-Top: A general view of commercial taro grown under wetland culture (note
the embankments used for flooding the petioles; middle: flit/aua, a variety of taro with
unusually large leaf blades and corms which, although the best yielder, is seldom grown
because it cannot be made into poi; lower left: Lauloa Palakea-eleele, with large, long
leaf blades with a few large undulations and the tall, erect petioles characteristic of the
group Lauloa; lower right: Apuwai, characterized by short, stocky growth and more or
less horizontal leaf blades which are crinkled and cup-shaped.

Taro Varieties in Ha.waii

33

Distribution: Widely planted on all the islands, almost exclusively in wet­
land patches; although grown extensively in the lowlands, it appears to
thrive better up toward the mountains where the water is cooler.
Use: A very important poi taro, particularly on Oahu.
Remarks: The corms have fairly firm texture and will absorb more water,
in the preparation of paiai/ than most varieties. The poi is light bluish-grey
in color and of very good quality.

19. Piko Keokeo
(Haehae Keokeo, Uaua Keolzeo)
General characteristics: Closely resembles Pika ](ea, but maturing within
12 to 15 months; differs in having white petiole base and chalky white
corm flesh.
Petiole: 60 to 95 em. long, light green, pinkish red at edge, usually with
adjacent dark green blotches especialIy near base, white at base.
Leaf blade: 30 to 45 em. long, 25 to' 35 em. wide, 20 to 35 em. from tip to
base of sinus, ovate, pendant, light to dark green; pilw whitish; lobes
narrow and obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with light yellow fibers; skin cream-colored.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Kcohea, meaning light or
white, refers to the corm flesh.
Distribution: Mainly as a mixture among other Pika varieties.
Use: Makes fairly good poi.

20. Piko Uaua
(Valla-Piko)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, matur­
ing in 12 to 15 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished from
other Pilw by dark green petioles and pinkish base.
Petiole: 65 to 100 em. long, dark green, usually edged narrowly with dark
pink or red, light pink at base with pink ring.
Leaf blade: 30 to 45 em. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 20 to 35 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, nearly horizontal, chartaceous, light to dark green; pika
whitish; lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with slight pinkish tinge near apex and yellowish fibers;
skin cream-colored.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the descriptive name Ualla,
meaning "tough," indicates that the extensive root system makes this
variety difficult to pull under wetland culture.
Distribution: Throughout the islands under both upland and wetland cul­
tures; grown most extensively in Waipio Valley, Hawaii, under wetland
culture.
Use: Makes poi of good quality.
Remarks: This is one of the hardiest of the Pilw taros, and probably the only
one grown to any extent under upland culture.
1 In the production of paiai, the cooked corms are ground and water is added to bring
the mass to a certain consistency. Tougb. rubbery, cooked taro, while difficult to pound under
the older methods of preparation, is regarded as desirable because of tbe good quality of the
resulting poi. The yields of paiai and of poi, which is simply a diluted form of l'aiai, depend
upon tbe amount of water the taro will absorb during grinding and that added later.

34

Bulletin 84, Hawaii E:-cperiment Station

21. Piko Uliuli
(Haehae) Pika Uli} Waianae)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, matur­
ing within 12 to 15 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha}' resembles Pika
Uaua very closely, but the petiole is white at base rather than pink.
Petiole: 60 to 100 em. long, dark green, usually edged narrowly with dark
pink or red, white at base.
Leaf blade: 30 to 45 em. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 20 to 35 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, nearly horizontal, firm-chartaceous, light to dark green;
pika whi tish; lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green; spathe 15 to 20 em. long, the lower tubular
constricted portion 3 to 4.5 em. long, green, usually tinged with red at
base, usually open partially exposing the ovaries, the upper portion deep
yellow; spadix 5 to 6 em. long, the sterile appendage about 4 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; derives descriptive name,
Uliuli, from dark green petioles.
Distribution: Widely planted on all the islands, especially Oahu, almost ex­
clusively under wetland culture.
Use: A very important commercial poi taro.
Remarks: This variety used to be grown extensively at Kaanapali, Maui, a
region of strong winds, which caused the leaves to be torn-hence the
local name Haehae. It is considered hardier than Pika Kea and shows less
rot, especially in the lowlands where the irrigation water is warmer.

22. Piko Eleele
(Haehae Eleele) Helemauna} Ipuolono} Makaopio)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, moderately stocky, matur­
ing within 12 to 15 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished
from other Pika taros by dark purplish petioles.
Petiole: 55 to 85 em. long, reddish-brown to purplish, especially on lower
half, with indistinct or narrow reddish edge and usually with adjacent
dark green blotches, particularly near the base, a brilliant dark pink ring
at base with light pink area flecked with light reddish-brown for 3 to
4 em. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 em. long, 20 to 30 em. wide, 20 to 30 em. from tip to base
of sinus, horizontal, broadly sagittate tapering abruptly to sharp point,
fairly firm in texture, dark green; pika light green to light pinkish; lobes
obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yellowish
fibers; skin pale salmon-pink, often purple along leaf-scar rings.
Inflorescence: Peduncle reddish-purple; spathe 15 to 20 em. long, the lower
tubular constricted portion 3 to 4.5 em. long, green, tinged with red at
base, usually partially open exposing the ovaries, the upper portion deep
yellow; spadix 5 to 6 em. long, the sterile appendage about 4 mm. long.

Taro Varieties in Ha:-&aii

3S

Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; called Eleele because of
its dark petioles.
Distribution: Grown either as wetland or upland taro; planted quite exten­
sively at Kona, Hawaii, under upland culture.
Use: A common poi taro; also considered an excellent table variety, and
the leaves are popular for luau..
.
Remarks: Piko Eleele does better in the upper valley areas where rainfall is
abundant and the water cool; at low elevations in water which has
become warm by passing through several paddies a soft starch is pro­
duced which rots readily. The name Piko Eleele is sometimes confused
with Pikoele; the latter is not a Piko taro.

23. Elepaio
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
stocky, maturing within 7 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 0"(1;
readily identified by green- and white-mottled leaves.
Petiole: 50 to 75 cm, long, fairly rigid, green- and white-striped, often slightly
tinged with reddish-brown, especially on lower half, yellowish at apex,
pink at edge, a pale pink ring at base with white for 3 to 4 em. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 em. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 30 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, fairly firm in texture, slightly concave, green- and white­
mottled; margins undulate; piko small, yellowish; lobes acute with very
narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green- and white-mottled; spathe 17.5 to 18 em. long,
the lower tubular portion about 2.5' em. long, green-and white-mottled,
the upper portion yellow mottled with white, slightly open near constric­
tion; spadix 6 cm. long, the sterile appendage 7 to 8 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; according to some natives it
grew wild near the forest where the bird Elepaio made its home, but
others maintain that this taro was formerly planted at dawn when the
Elepaio was singing.
Distribution: Found mainly on Hawaii in small patches, principally under
upland culture; of little importance because of its low yield.
Use: Makes good poi of a light gray color.
Remarks: This variety displays true variegation, and the striking green and
white mottling of the leaves makes the plant very attractive. The amount
of white area varies to a certain extent, according to environmental
conditions.

24. Uahiapele
(Hiwa) Pau 0 Hiiaka} Ualehu} Uwahiapelc)
General characteristics: Medium in height, slender, moderately spreading,
maturing in about 12 months, producing fairly numerous oha (usually
over 10); readily identified by mottled green and purplish leaf blades.
Petiole: 70 to 85 cm. long, slender, lilac-purple flecked with streaks of pur­
plish-black especially on lower half, distinctly purplish-black at edge,

36

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

white at base, the apex whitish on outer surface and reddish-purple
on inner.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, fairly concave, conspicuously mottled with green and
dark purple especially on lower surface; margins quite undulate; pika
purple; veins light reddish-purple on lower surface of lobes; lobes
obtuse to slightly acute with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white with pink or light to
dark purple leaf-scar rings.
Inflorescence: Peduncle lilac-purple with occasional dark purple streaks;
spathe 18 to 24 cm. long, the lower tubular portion 3 to 4 cm. long, green
with lilac-purple flecks and a few purple streaks, the upper portion
yellow, tightly rolled or sometimes open near constriction; spadix 6 cm.
long, the sterile appendage 6 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; called Uahiapclc, or "smoke
of Pcle" because of smoky appearance of purplish- and green-mottled
leaves and smoky gray poi made from the corms.
Distribution: Formerly grown to some extent at Ewa, Oahu, under wetland
culture, but at present found most commonly on Hawaii and occasionally
on Kauai, under upland culture.
Use: Makes a high-quality smoky-gray poi; formerly highly prized for
medicinal purposes and as an offering to the gods.
Remarks: This variety has many of the characteristics of the Kai group, in
particular the tough, rubbery consistency of the cooked corm.

25. Manapiko
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, stocky, maturing within
12 to 15 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha,. recognized by purplish
blotching on pika extending along midrib and on primary veins of the
lobes, forming'a more or less distinct Y.
Petiole: 65 to 80 cm. long, dark green, conspicuously whitish at edge, dark
reddish-purple at apex, white for 3 to 4 em. above base, abruptly curved
at apex.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 em. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, vertical, dark green with bluish cast, a dark purple
streak on lower surface running from base of sinus to pika,. margins
slightly undulate; pika conspicuously dark purple, blotched, the color
extending along midrib and veins of lobes; lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, occasionally
faintly pink along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name lI1anapil;:o refers
to the branching coloration of the pilw.
Distribution: Rare variety.
Use: Fair table taro.
Remarks: This variety does not belong to either the Mana or the Pika group
as the name might imply.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

37

26. Tahitian
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderately spreading, stocky,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; similar to
M anapika but with much lighter petioles and leaf blades.
Petiole: 70 to 85 em. long, rigid, light yellowish-green, indistinctly pale
pinkish to whitish at edge, light reddish-purple at apex, white for 3 to
4 em. above base, abruptly curved at apex.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 em. long, 30 to 35 em. wide, 35 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, vertical, light green; margins slightly undulate; pika
conspicuously blotched with dark purple, running into veins; veins
reddish on lower surface of lobes; lobes acute with deep, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light green; spathe ;I.bout 30 em. long, the lower
tubular portion about 5 em. long, light green with purplish area at base,
the upper portion yellow, rather widely open at base upon maturity.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced by Wilder from Tahiti; no
name has been found for this variety so it has merely been called
"Tahitian."
Distribution: Little-known variety of limited distribution.
Use: Mainly as a table taro.

GROUP KAI

This group, comprising three varieties, is distinguished by the
concave, pendant blades with distinct, finely undulating margins,
and by the tough rubbery texture of the cooked corms. The time of
cooking is often twice as long as for other varieties-. A fragrant odor
(ala) is usually emitted when the corms are cooked: hence the name
Ala is sometimes used, instead of Kai} for this group. It is difficult to
make poi from the Kai taros by the old Hawaiian method of hand
pounding the cooked corms on a poi board, and even in the commercial
poi factories, where machines are used for grinding the corms, the Kai
taros generally must be run through the machine twice before the poi
is satisfactory. However, they give a high yield of paiai.
The Kai} the Pilw} and the Leltua are the three most important
groups of commercial taros. They are used almost exclusively for
poi making, and are almost invariably grown under wetland culture.
The Kai are very popular on Kallai and are planted in several local­
ities on Oahu. Observations seem to indicate that they are more
tolerant of alkaline conditions than any other group, and of stag­
nant water. They are also tolerant of deep or soft patches whereas
most varieties require a firm, relatively shallow soil, and there is
evidence that Kai are more resistant to soft rot.

38

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

Although this group is widely planted and the corms have impor­
tant and characteristic qualities, the Kai have no outstanding surface
characters by which they may be readily identified, especially if the
specimen to be identified has been pulled from the field. Yet any
experienced taro grower can readily recognize a Kai as he walks
through a planting. The most outstanding feature seems to be the
pendant position of the leaves. This apparently results from the
slenderness of the petiole, especially above the petiole sinus, which
causes the petiole to curve perceptibly and gives to the plant a
generally widespread appearance.
27. Kai Uliuli
(Kai Eleele)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; identified by light reddish­
brown tinge of petioles.
Petiole: 70 to 85 em. long, diffused with light reddish-brown, conspicuously
whitish to yellowish at edge, a dark reddish-purple ring at base with
light pink for about 3 em. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to S5 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate, concave, pendant, giving the impression of
being slightly wilted, dark green; margins with numerous fine undula­
tions; pika light green to faint purplish; veins light green on upper surface,
usually light reddish-purple on lower; lobes obtuse to slightly acute
with wide, fairly deep sinus.
Corm: Flesh white tinged with lilac-pink, especially near apex; skin pale
pinkish-lilac.
Inflorescence: Peduncle yellowish flecked profusely with purple; spathe 18 to
20 em. long, the lower tubular portion about 4 em. long, yellowish-green
with slight purplish tinge, the upper portion deep yellow, open near con­
.striction at maturity and tightly rolled above; spadix 7 to 8 em. long,
the sterile appendage 4 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Ulillii refers to the
darkish color of the petioles.
Distribution: Well-known and distributed throughout the Territory, par­
ticularly on Oahu and Kauai. It is usually grown in areas which are
inclined to be swampy or in deep patches.
Use: Almost exclusively for commercial poi; the poi is dark bluish-gray and
is of excellent quality.

28. Kai Ala
(Ala, Ala Keoluro)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; identified by widely spread­
ing, light yellowish-green to almost whitish petioles.

Taro Va1'ieties in Hawaii

39

Petiole: 75 to 90 em. long, light yellowish-green to whitish, distinctly reddish
at edge, brownish at apex, a white or faint cream-colored ring at base
with white for about 3 em. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, concave, pendant, light green; margins with numerous
fine undulations, the marginal veins hard and crisp in texture; pika
yellowish to light brownish; lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle whitish; spathe 19 to 22 em. long, the lower con­
stricted portion 3 to 4 em. long, light green, the upper portion light
yellow, somewhat open; spadix 7 to 9 cm. long, the sterile appendage
7 to 10 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name A/a refers to the
fragrant odor of the cooked corms, a characteristic common to all varieties
of Kai.
Distribution: Found only occasionally, almost exclusively under wetland
culture, usually associated with Kai Kea.
Use: Makes poi of good quality.

29. Kai Kea
(Ala Kea)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; except for the pinkish flush
near the petiole base, it is very similar to Kai Ala.
Petiole: 70 to 90 cm. long, light yellowish-green with pink flush particularly
conspicuous near base, distinctly reddish at edge, light reddish-purple at
apex, a reddish-purple ring at base with lilac-pinlt for 3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 cm. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, concave, pendant, dark green; margins with numerous
fine undulations; veins light green on upper surface, usually light reddish­
purple on lower; pika small, reddish-purple; lobes obtuse to slightly
acute, quite undulate, with fairly deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pink tinge particularly conspicuous at apex; skin
light pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light yellowish-green; spathe 18 to 23 cm. long, the
lower tubular portion 3 to 4 cm. long, yellowish-green usually with pink
tinge and reddish area at base, loosely rolled and occasionally some­
what open, the upper portion yellow, loosely rolled and open near con­
striction; spadix 6 to 9 cm. long, the sterile appendage 7 to 11 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Kea refers to the
light-colored petioles.
Distribution: Most widely planted variety of the Kai, grown throughout the
islands but particularly on Kauai and at Waialua, Oahu. Except in a
few scattered localities in Hawaii, this taro is grown under wetland culture.
Use: The poi is of excellent quality and was highly esteemed by the Hawaiian
chiefs.

40

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experil1tent Station

30. Apuwai
General characteristics: Short, moderately spreading, very stocky, maturing
within 6 to 9 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; rcadily identified by
the cup-shaped, definitely crinkled blades and light self-green petioles.
Petiole: 35 to 50 cm. long, broad at base, thick and rigid, light green with
white for 3 to 5 cm. above base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 40 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 30 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, horizontal, very crinkled and conspicuously cupped, medium
green; pilla and veins light green; lobes obtuse, distinctly overlapping,
with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with indistinct, yelJowish fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light green; spathe usually loosely enclosing spadix
to base of plant, light green on lower tubular portion, the upper portion
20 to 25 cm. long, light yellow, usually open and ordinarily rolled only
at the tip; spadix usually 17 to 20 cm. long, a spongy naked base with the
ovulate portion extcnding along about 8 to 9 cm. and ovaries sparsely
arranged on the lower part, the sterile appendage about 1 cm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; it derives its name from
the fact that its leaves are shaped like a cup (aplt) and hold water (wai)
in the form of dew and rain.
Distribution: Essentially a wetland taro although it is found in a few scat­
tered localities in Kana under upland culture. Formerly it was widely
planted, especially in Kohala, Hawaii. It is now sometimes found grow­
ing wild in wet places near the woods.
Use: This variety is now grown mainly for its leaves which are highly
prized for luau. The corm makes good poi of very light color, soft in con­
sistency, and easy to pound and prepare, and also serves as a good
table taro.

31. Apu
(Oapu)
General characteristics: Short, moderately spreading, stocky, maturing with­
in 6 to 9 months, producing from 10 to 15 aha; resembles Apltwai very
closely, the latter having a more crinkled leaf blade and a deeper-set pika.
Petiole: 40 to 60 cm. long, rigid, light green with inconspicuous greenish
edge, white at base.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 cm. long, 35 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 40 em. from tip to
base of sinus, horizontal, ovate, somewhat cupped, light green; pi/w light
green; lobes obtuse, frequently overlapping, with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with inconspicuous yellowish fibers; skin cream­
colored.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; it derives its name from the
fact that the leaves are somewhat cup-shaped.
Distribution: A little-known taro at the present time; the only planting
found was on Maui.
Use: Sparingly as a table taro.

Taro Vmoieties in Hawaii

41

32. Piialii
(Ahapii, Moiula, Molwlze)
General characteristics: Short, erect, stocky, maturing within 8 to 12 months,
producing from 2 to 5 aha; easily distinguished by broad, crinkly blades
and short, stocky, dark green petioles tinged with pink.
Petiole: 45 to 65 cm. long, fairly thick and rigid, dark green with pinkish
tinge and conspicuous narrow red edge, a reddish-purple ring at base
with lilac-pink for 3 to 4 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 cm. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 40 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, horizontal, ovate, slightly cupped, crinkled, dark green with
light pinkish cast on lower surface; pika small, light pinkish to greenish;
marginal veins often tinged with red; lobes obtuse with shallow, wide
sinus.
Corm: Flesh lilac-purple with darker purple fibers; skin brilliant reddish­
purple.
Inflorescence: Peduncle yellowish-green; spathe 26 to 33 cm. long, the lower
tubular portion usually 4.5 to 6 cm. or sometimes as much as 9 cm. long,
yellowish-green, often tinged with red, the upper portion yellow, usually
rather open or loosely rolled; spadix 9 to 12 cm. long, the sterile append"
age 1.2 to 2 cm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Piialii means
"ascending from the alii," and refers to the high esteem in which it was
held by the chiefs.
Distribution: Essentially a wetland taro although grown to some extent
under upland culture in Kona, where it goes under the name fl.I01:/lla. This
variety is one of the most important of the wetland poi taros, and is
planted extensively on the windward side of Oahu.
Use: Makes a red poi that is highly prized for flavor and quality.
Remarks: This is one of the oldest varieties grown in the islands, known in
the early days of Hawaiian history as one of the royal taros. It was
considered particularly desirable as an offering to the gods. The Chinese
generally harvest this taro at 12 to 14 months, the Hawaiian growers at
8 to 10 months when the quality is considered b,etter although the total
yield is not so great.

33. Paakai
(Launui Paalwi)
General characteristics: Short, moderately spreading, stocky, maturing with­
in 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished by short,
stocky growth and dark green petioles with distinct, narrow reddish edges.
Petiole: 45 to 60 cm. long, very dark green with a distinct, narrow reddish
edge, white at base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 30 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate, slightly concave, fairly crinkled, dark green;
pilw light yellowish; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, sometimes
reddish-purple along the leaf-scar rings.

42

Bulletin 84} Hawaii Experiment Station

Inflorescence: Peduncle light green; spathe 21 to 24 em. long, the lower
tubular portion 3 to 4 em. long, loosely rolled, light green with tinge of
purple at base, the upper portion deep yellow, open near constriction
even when young; spadix 7 to 8 em. long, the sterile appendage 8 to 9
mm.long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Paakai, meaning "salt,"
probably tefers to the somewhat salty taste of the poi.
Distribution: Found occasionally on Kauai and in South Kona, Hawaii,
usually under upland culture.
Use: Chiefly for poi.

34. Moana
(Mauna)
General characteristics: Short, stiffly erect, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12
months, producing from S to 10 aha; characterized by short, stocky
growth, broad, horizontal, crinkled leaves, and light self-green coloring
of the petioles.
Petiole: 40 to S5 em. long, light green with inconspicuous, light greenish
edge, a white area for 3 to S em. above base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 30 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, broadly ovate, almost horizontal, somewhat crinkled but not
cupped, dark green; pika yellowish; lobes acute and usually overlapping, with
medium-cut sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white to cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light green; spathe 22 to 25 em. long, the lower
tubular portion 4 to 5 em. long, light green, the upper portion light
yellow, rather tightly rolled.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; M oall,a, meaning "broad" in
Hawaiian, probably refers to the broad, ovate leaf blades.
Distribution: A little-known variety, found in home plots on MauL
Use: Table taro of excellent quality.

35. Akuugawai
General characteristics: Tall, erect, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months,
producing from 2 to 5 aha; identified by tall, upright, dark green petioles
with distinct blackish edges, and horizontal leaf blades.
Petiole: 80 to 9S em. long, very dark green with indistinct, light green streaks,
often slightly tinged with purple, conspicuously blackish at edge, white
or greenish-white at base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 4S em. long, 25 to 30 em. wide, 3S to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly sagittate, conspicuously concave, horizontal, dark
green; pika purple; lobes obtuse, overlapping, with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin whitish.
Inflorescence: Peduncle dark green with brown flecking at base; spathe 26
to 28 em. long, the lower tubular portion 4 to 4.5 em. long, dark green
with purple at base and at constriction and sometimes along margins,
the upper portion dark yellow; spadix 8.5 to 9 em. long, the sterile

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

43

appendage about 1 em. long, orange as contrasted to the yellow stami­
nate portion.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from the South Seas by \Vilder;
the name Akuugawai, under which it was introduced, has been retained.
Distribution: Little-known variety of limited distribution.
Use: Good table taro but makes very poor poi.
Remarks: The rank, erect habit of growth is similar to that of the Lalllaa
group.

GROUP LAULOA

The group Lauloa is characterized by long petioles and long, sagit­
tate, usually quite undulate blades: hence the name Lauloa, meaning
large or long leaf. The varieties within this group are nearly iden­
tical as to length of petiole and size and shape of the blade. The
plants are tall with an erect, compact habit of growth and are the
most vigorous of all the taros. They produce oha sparingly and
mature usually in from 8 to 12 months. The group is represented
by seven varieties in the station's plantings, and an eighth has been
described from previously recorded data.
The Lauloa taros are planted almost exclusively under upland
culture, most extensively in Kana, Hawaii, where they make excel­
lent growth, and also in Puna and Kau. They are comparatively
nonacrid and, probably for this reason, were used by the early
Hawaiians for medicinal purposes, chiefly in pulmonary disorders.
They are now popular principally as table taros a1though they are
still used to a limited degree for poi.
The Lauloa group is somewhat unstable, the different forms pro­
ducing occasional somatic mutations (4).
36. Lauloa Eleele-omao
(Lauloa. Eleele, Lauloa H a Eleele)
General characteristics: Tall, erect, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months,
producing from 5 to 10 aha; recognized by purplish marginal veins on
leaves and greenish edges of purplish-black petioles.
Petiole: 100 to 140 em. long, purplish-black with fairly distinct light green
edge, a dark red ring at base with light pink for 1 to 2 em. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 60 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, slightly concave, dark green; margins with a few large
updulations, the marginal veins purple; pika small, purplish; lobes obtuse
with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white, tinged with pink especially near the apex, with yellowish
fibers; skin light to brilliant dark pink and occasionally purple along
leaf-scar rings.

44

Bulletin 84, I-I aWllii Experiment Station

Inflorescence: Peduncle purplish-black; spathe 30 to 35 em. long, usually
curved and drooping, the lower tubular portion 5.5 to 6 cm. long, dark
reddish-purple, the upper portion orange with reddish-purple margins,
usually tightly rolled but sometimes slightly open near constriction.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the descriptive name Eleele
refers to the purplish-black color of the petioles and the suffix 01llUO to the
light green edges.
Distribution: Planted fairly extensively in the uplands throughout the
islands but especially so in KQna, Hawaii.
Use: Mainly as a table taro.
Remarks: This variety resembles LauToa Eleele-uTa so closely that at times
it is practically impossible to distinguish the two. Although the outward
appearance is almost identical, the quality of poi made from Lauloa Eleele­
ula is far superior to that from this variety. The two varieties may be
differentiated by the greenish edge and continuance of the petiole color into
the leaf veins of Lauloa Eleele-omao in contrast to the more pinkish edge
and the changing of the dark petiole color to a yetiow green just below the
apex of LUI/loa El('ele-1I1u..

37. Lauloa Eleele-ula
(Eleele Lauloa.)
General characteristics: Tall, ered, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months,
producing from 2 to 5 oha; recognized by purplish-black petioles with
pinkish edges.
Petiole: 100 to 140 cm. long, purplish-black with pinkish edge, light green at
apex, a dark red ring at base with pink for 1 to 2 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 60 cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, slightly concave, dark green; margins with a few
large undulations, the marginal veins purple; pilw small, purplish; lobes
obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white tinged with pink, especially ncar the apex, with yellowish
fibers; skin light to brilliant dark pink and occasionally purple along
leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the suffix ula refers to the
pinkish color of the edges.
Distribution: Planted somewhat extensively in the uplands throughout the
islands, particularly in Kona.
Use: Grown mainly for home use as poi taro.
Remarks: Although in vegetative characters this variety is very similar to
the other Luuloa, and it has occurred as a mutant forlll, in corm texture and
quality of poi it is more closely related to the Eleele group.

38. Lauloa Palakea-eleele
(Palakea., Lauloa Pala/zea)
General characteristics: Tatl, erect, stocky, maturing within 8 to 12 months,
producing from 5 to 10 aha; the conspicuous black edge is a distinguish­
ing feature.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

45

Petiole: 100 to 140 cm. long, dark green heavily suffused with dark reddish­
purple especially on upper half, dark purplish at apex, white at base, con­
spicuously blackish at edge.
Leaf blade: 45 to 65 cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 50 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, slightly concave, dark green; margins with a few large
undulations; piko purplish; veins dark purplish on lower surface of lobes;
lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yellowish fibers; skin white or yellowish.
Inflorescence: Peduncle yellowish-green with faint brownish tinge, often
reddish-purple at apex; spathe 32 to 37 cm. long, the lower tubular por­
tion 5 to 6 cm. long, reddish-purple, the upper portion dark yellow with
reddish-purple margins, bent and drooping, usually tightly folded but
sometimes slightly open near constriction; spadix about 11 cm. long, the
sterile appendage conspicuous, about 13 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; four members of the Lauloa
group have the descriptive name Palallea, which refers to the soft, white
consistency of the cooked corm. The distinguishing suffix, eleele, indicates
the black edge of this form of Lauloa Pola/~ea.
Distribution: Grown quite extensively in Kona, Hawaii, almost exclusively
as upland taro.
Use: Used primarily as a table taro, being considered superior to both
Lallloa Palakea-Ileokeo and Lort/oa Palakea-lIla although the poi is consid­
ered inferior to that of any of the standard poi taros; highly favored as a
medicinal taro by the early Hawaiians.
Remarks: This variety is one of the hardiest of the taros, withstanding ad­
verse weather conditions under which other varieties will not survive.
Under favorable conditions it yields well and is con.lparatively early
maturing. It is less acrid than most taros; hence its popularity for
medicinal purposes.

39. Lauloa Palakea-ula
General characteristics: Tall, erect, maturing within 9 to 12 months, pro­
ducing from 5 to 10 01£0.; characterized by pinkish edge and white base
of petiole.
Petiole: 100 to 140 cm. long, dark green heavily suffused with dark reddish­
purple especially on upper half, purplish at apex, white at base, with
distinct reddish-pink to almost \vhitish edge.
Leaf blade: 45 to 65 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 50 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, slightly concave, dark green; margins with a few largl'
undulations; piko purplish; veins dark purplish on lower surface of lobes;
lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with light yellowish fibers; skin yellowish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety of comparatively recent
origin, probably arising through somatic mutation from LOIl/oo Palake(l­
eleele; given the suffix lila because of the distinguishing pink edge.
Distribution: Found occasionally among plantings of Lall/oa Palokea-elecle.
It is considered inferior in quality and is usually rogued out.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.

46

Bulletin 84, Hawaii ExperiHtent Station

40. Lauloa Palakea-papamu
(Papamu, Lauloa Papaniu)
General characteristics: Tall, erect, maturing within 9 to 12 months, pro­
ducing from 5 to 10 oha; closely resembles Lauloa Palakea-elcele and Lall­
loa Palakea-ltla but differentiated by the pink petiole base.
Petiole: 100 to 140 em. long, dark green heavily suffused with dark reddish­
purple to blackish, especially on upper portion, purplish at apex, a
brilliant pink ring at base, distinctly reddish-pink to almost whitish at
edge.
Leaf blade: 45 to 65 em. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 50 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, slightly concave, dark green; margins with a few large
undulations; piko purplish; veins purplish on lower surface of lobes;
lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white except for light pinkish tinge, especially near apex, the
fibers yellowish; skin pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle yellowish, flecked with green and purple; spathe
20 to 24 em. long, the lower tubular portion about 4 em. long, light
purplish, the upper portion medium yellow with reddish edge; spadix 8
to 10 em. long, the sterile appendage 11 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety of comparatively recent
origin, probably originating through somatic mutation; the derivation of
the descriptive suffix is unknown.
Distribution: Found only occasionally among the other forms of Lallloa
Palakea.
Use: Chiefly as table taro.

41. Lauloa Palakea-keokeo
(Lauloa Onionio)
General characteristics: Tall, erect, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months,
producing from 5- to 10 aha; identified by needle-like black streaks 011
dark green petioles.
Petiole: 100 to 140 cm. long, dark green with a few short blackish streaks,
tinged with reddish-purple at apex and often near edge, indistinctly
reddish at edge, a brilliant pink ring at base with light pink for 2 to
3 em. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 65 cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 35 to 50 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly sagittate, slightly concave, dark green with bluish
cast; margins with a few large undulations; pika purplish; lobes aClltc
with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yellowish
fibers; skin brilliant pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green with black streaks, reddish-purple at apex;
spathe 30 to 35 cm. long, the lower tubular portion 5.5 to 6 em. long,
yellowish-green with reddish-purple at constriction, the upper portion
yellow, curved and drooping, usually tightly rolled bnt sometimes open
near constriction; spadix 12 em. long, the sterile appendage 12 to 17 nUll.
long.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

47

Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety of probably rather recent
origin produced through somatic mutation; this variety has much lighter
petioles than the other Lauloa PaIallea-hence the suffix keolleo.
Distribution: Found exclusively under upland culture, occasionally as a
mutation from Lauloa Palallea-eleele; it is usually rogued out as it is con­
sidered inferior.
Use: Sparingly as a table taro.
Remarks: Four forms of Lauloa PaIakea are commonly known, all characterized
by soft, white corms, anei distinguished from each other by some coloring
on the petioles. Lauloa Palakea-lleokeo is the most easily distinguished,
as the other three varieties are dark green heavily suffused with reddish­
purple. The black streaking on the petiole of this variety is extremely
narrow, most of the streaks being scarcely wider than the thickness of a
needle and of uniform thickness for their entire length.

42. Lauloa Keokeo

(Lauloa Ha Keoheo)
Genera.l characteristics: Tall, erect, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months,
producing from 3 to 10 oha; distinguished by practically self-green
petioles.
Petiole: 100 to 140 cm. long, medium green slightly tinged with reddish­
purple at apex, pinkish-red at edge, a red ring at base with light pink
for 3 to 4 em. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 60 cm. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly sagittate, slightly concave, medium green; margins
with a few large undulations; piko small, light purplish; lobes obtuse
with medium-cut to fairly deep sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yellowish
fibers; skin light to dark pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light green; spathe green on lower tubular portion
with faint purp,Ie areas at base and at constriction, the upper portion
yellow.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; this is the lightest colored of
the Lallloa; hence the name Keolleo.
Distribution: Widely distributed throughout the islands, almost exclusively
in the uplands, but especially common in Kana, Puna, and Kau, Hawaii.
This variety is probably the most important of the Lauloa.
Use: Used primarily as a table taro.
GROUP ELEELE

This group, comprising two varieties, is characterized by a blackish
or reddish-brown petiole with a dark reddish-purple ring at the
base, a dark lilac-purple area for 3 to 4 cm. above the ring, and by
the light lilac-purple corm flesh. The varieties in this group consti­
tuted the so-called "royal black taros" of the early Hawaiians. They

48

Bulletin 84, Hawaii E.1:periment Station

mature usually within 8 months and are fairly high producers. The
corms must be harvested soon after maturity as they begin to rot
very quickly. Even the huH deteriorate if held over for any length
of time after harvesting. They are grown primarily under upland
culture and are especially popular in Kona where they are made into
red poi of excellent quality.

43. Eleele Makoko
(Nohu, M akoko )
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 oha; characterized by light purplish­
black petioles shading into yellowish-green at apex and light lilac-purple
corm flesh.
Petiole: 60 to 85 em. long, drooping, light purplish-black on lower part
shading into yellowish-green at apex, with an inconspicuous, narrow
reddish edge, a dark reddish-purple ring at base with dark lilac-purple
for 3 to 4 em. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 4S em. long, 25 to 3S em. wide, 25 to 35 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, medium green; margins undulate; piko light brownish;
lobes acute with medium-cut sinus.
Corm: Flesh light lilac-purple; skin light reddish-purple.
Inflorescence: Peduncle blackish; spathe 22 to 25 cm. long, the lower tubular
portion 3.5 to 4.5 em. long, yellowish-green tinged with brown, with
purplish areas at base and at constriction, the upper portion yellowish,
slightly open at maturity; spadix 7 to 9 cm. long, the sterile appendage
6 to 7 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; makoko is a reddish fish.
Distribution: Not planted as widely as Eleele Naioea but its distribution is
quite general; chiefly under upland culture.
Use: Makes light red poi of good quality; although not important com­
mercially, it is grown fairly extensively for home use.

44. Eleele Naioea
(NtMoea, Eleele)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 oha; characterized by blackish
petioles, similar to those of Kltmu-eleele, Lauloa Eleele-omao, and L01l10a
Eleele-ula, and by dark purplish-lilac corm flesh.
Petiole: 65 to 90 em. long, blackish with inconspicuous narrow brownish
to greenish edge, yellowish-green at apex, a dark reddish-purple ring at
base with dark lilac-purple for 3 to 4 em. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 em. long, 25 to 3S CII1. wide, 30 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, drooping, slightly undulate, dark green, often with
pinkish cast when young; pika inconspicuous, light reddish-brown; lobes
acute with wide sinus.

48a

Fig. 5.-Upper right: Mal/a U/i1lIi, characterized by branching" parent COrlll allll
pendant leaf blades; LIpper left: M Ollila, with short, stocky growth alld
slightly crillkled, horizontal leaf blades; middle left: Pilw Utill/i, one of
the Ieadillg wetland varieties, with sillus cut to poillt of attachment with the
petiole; middle right: lI.[lIlJ.ini 1'Ol'c(OI'(!, with slriped petioles; lower left:
J:lc/1I/.io, a picturesque variely with mottled green and white leaf hlades;
lower right: /1'1('<'11, one of the few varieties of taro prodllcillg rhizomes.
Nple the slender rhizomes 011 the foreground.

Taro Varieties in H aWl.lii

49

Corm: Flesh lilac-purple with conspicuous darker purple fibers; skin dark
reddish-purple.
Inflorescence: Peduncle black; spathe 24 to 26 cm. long, the lower tubular
portion 3.5 to 4.5 cm. long, yellowish-green tinged with brown, with purplish
areas at base and constriction, the upper portion yellow, slightly open at
maturity; spadix 8 to 9 cm. long, the sterile appendage 6 to 7 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the derivation of the
descriptive name is unknown.
Distribution: Very popular upland taro cultivated extensively in Kona, Kau,
and Puna, Hawaii.
Use: The lilac-purple corms produce red poi that is highly prized.

45. Manini-owali
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 oha; identified
by yellowish-green to light red stripes on dark purplish background.
Petiole: 80 to 100 cm. long, broad at base tapering to a narrow, often curved
apex, dark purple with yellowish green, light red, or sometimes quite
indistinct stripes, pink to whitish at edge, a brilliant reddish-purple ring
at base with lilac-pink for 1 to 2 cm. above.
Leaf blade: SO to 60 cm. long, 35 to 40 cm. wide, 40 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, firm-chartaceous, dark green with bluish cast; mar­
gins undulate; pilw purple; veins purple on lower surface; lobes acute
with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge especially near apex, the fibers yel­
lowish; skin lilac-pink with purple along leaf scars.
Inflorescence: Peduncle purplish-black or striped with purplish-black and
yellowish-green or light red; spathe 26 to 30 em. long, the lower tubular
portion 4.5 to 5.5 em. long, striped light green and purple with reddish­
purple at base and constrictiun, the upper portion deep yellow or orange,
sometimes with purplish margins, tightly rolled, open near constriction
at maturity; spadix 10 to 11 em. long, the sterile appendage 11 to 12 mm.
long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; mallini is a small striped
Hawaiian fish, while o'Wuli means weakness.
Distribution: Comparatively rare; grown under upland or wetland culture.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.

46. Kumu-eleele
General characteristics: Medium in height, slender, erect, maturing within
9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 oha; recognized by its blackish
petioles with inconspicuous narrow reddish edges.
Petiole: 70 to 90 cm. long, blackish, with inconspicuous narrow reddish
edges, greenish at apex, a dark pink ring at base with light pink for
2 to 3 cm. above.

50

Bulletin 84 Hawaii Expe1'imellt Stati01i
J

Leaf blade: 45 to 60 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, drooping, thin in texture, dark green with bluish cast;
margins slightly undulate; pika small, purple; lobes obtuse to slightly
acute with medium-cut to deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with lilac at apex, the fibers yellowish; skin lilac-pink,
often dark purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; KIt7I1U refers to dark pinkish
tinge of corm, similar to color of the Hawaiian fish, and eleele refers to
blackish color of the petioles.
Distribution: Rare; collected by Dr. E. S. C. Handy from Olowalu, Maui.
Use: Chiefly as table taro.

47. Nawao
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 oha; charac­
terized by whitish corm flesh and purplish-black petioles shading into
yellowish-green at apex, with red edges.
Petiole: 55 to 75 em. long, purplish-black shading into yellowish-green at
apex, red at edge, a dark pink ring at base with light pink for 3 to 4 em.
above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 em. long, 30 to 35 em. wide, 30 to 35 em. from tip to base
of sinus, subovate, fairly firm in texture, dark green; piko light yellowish
to light brownish; lobes acute with deep, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yellow­
ish fibers; skin pink.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light yellowish-green with brownish flecking at base;
spathe 18 to 23 em. long, the lower tubular portion 3 to 4 em. long, light
green tinged with purple at base, loosely rolled and sometimes slightly
open, the upper portion clear deep yellow, open near constriction.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; nawao means "that which is
bad" and may indicate that this variety had a poor reputation as a poi
taro among the Hawaiians.
Distribution: Found occasionally under upland culture in Puna, Hawaii.
Use: A fair table taro.

GROUP ULAULA

This group, comprised of three varieties, is characterized by
conspicuously red or purplish petioles, comparatively small, ovate
blades, and reddish-tinged flowers. These taros produce aha rather
freely. They are grown under either upland or wetland culture and
are used both for poi and as table taro. Although found in many
localities, the varieties are grown in small patches, chiefly for home
consumption, and the group is of very little commercial importance.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

Sl

48. U1au1a Kumu
(KU1nu)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading,
maturing within 8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; identified by
the brilliant light red petioles.
Petiole: 75 to 100 cm. long, brilliant light red occasionally faintly diffused
with yellowish-green, indistinctly dark reddish at edge, a dark red ring
at base with dark pink for 3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark glossy green with bluish cast; pika conspicuous,
purple; veins reddish on lower surface; lobes obtuse, undulate on mar­
gins, with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, the fibers yellow­
ish; skin pinkish-lilac.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light red; spathe 21 to 23 cm. long, the lower tubular
portion 3 to 4 cm. long, dark reddish-purple, tightly rolled, the upper
portion dark yellow with tinge of red throughout, dark red with dark red
streaks at margins, light red inside, partially open near constriction at
maturity; spadix about 7 cm. long, the sterile appendage 4 to 5 mm. long,
not clearly differentiated from staminate portion.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; named after the brilliant red
Hawaiian fish, kllmu, because of the brilliant reddish color of the petioles.
Distribution: Found scattered throughout the islands in small patches under
both wetland and upland cultures.
Use: Both as poi and as table taro, principally for home consumption; for­
merly this variety was used as an offering to the gods.
Remarks: This is one of the most brilliantly colored of the taros.

49. U1aula Poni
(Poni Ulaula)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading, ma­
turing within 8 to 10 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; recognized by
the dark reddish-pu;ple petioles, inconspicuously striped with lighter
color, with bright reddish edges.
Petiole: 75 to 100 cm. long, dark reddish-purple shading to purplish-lilac on
upper third, inconspicuously striped with lighter color, distinctly bright
reddish at edge, a purple ring at base with narrow, bright red area for
2 to 4 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark glossy green with bluish cast; pika conspicuous,
purple; veins bright reddish on lower surface; lobes obtuse, undulate
on margins, with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish apex, the fibers yellowish; skin brilliant
lilac-pink, often dark purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; palli, meaning "purple,"
refers to the petiole coloring.

52

Bulletin 84, H a'looii Experimellt Station

Distribution: Often found associated with the other Vlallla, usually in the
uplands.
Use: Occasionatly as a table taro; in early times a purple pigment was
extracted from the petioles and used by the natives for dyeing tapa,
straw hats, etc.

50. Ulaula Moano
(Ieie, law)
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderately spreading, maturing
within 8 to 10 months, producing frol11 5 to 10 aha; characterized by
reddish-purple petioles with inconspicuous yetlowish-green stripes.
Petiole: 70 to 95 cm. long, red near base shading to reddish-purple above,
with inconspicuous yellowish-green stripes especially 011 midsection, in­
distinctly dark reddish at edge, a dark red ring at base with dark pink
for 3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark glossy green with bluish cast; pilw large, distinct,
purple; primary and marginal veins reddish on lower surface; lobes
obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, the fibers yellow­
ish; skin pinkish-titac.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; named after the Hawaiian
fish, maano, which is reddish to reddish-purple with brownish markings.
Distribution: Planted in a few scattered localities throughout the islands,
usuatty under upland culture.
Use: Both for poi and as table taro, principatly for home consumption.

51. Niue-ulaula
(Niue)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, stocky, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished by its
deep reddish-brown petioles and white base.
Petiole: 65 to 80 cm. long, deep reddish-brown slightly diffused with green,
purplish-red at apex, white at base, with a narrow, dark pinkish edge.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 cm. long, 25 to 35 cm. wide, 30 to 45 cm. frolll tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, dark green with bluish cast; pika large, conspicuous,
purple; veins distinctly purplish-red Oil lower surface, usuatly purplish
on upper; lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yetlow fibers; skill white to cream-colored.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from South Seas by Wilder as
one of two distinct forms named Niue .. the suffix tdaula has been added to
designate the reddish hue of the petioles.
Distribution: Limited; grown primarily under upland culture.
Use: Principally as a table taro.
Remarks: According to Christophersen (2), Nille is aIJparently the name for
a group comprising at least three varieties; the writers have not, how­

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

53

ever, been able to ascertain any characters by which the mcmbcrs of thc
group are linked.

52. Oopukai
(Kaimoi)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; distinguished by lilac-purple
corm flesh and reddish-purple flecked stripes.
Petiole: 65 to 90 cm. long, light yellowish-green with dark purplc or rcdrlish­
purple flecked stripes and blotches, dark red at edge, reddish-purple at
apex, a dark reddish-purple ring at base with purplish-pink for 3 to 4
cm. above.
Leaf blade: 50 to 65 cm. long, 35 to 45 cm. wide, 40 to 50 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark green with bluish cast; margins undulate; pilw
purple; veins conspicuously reddish-purple over entire lower surface;
lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh light lilac-purple with darker purplish fibers; skin dark pinkish­
lilac.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; OO!,ukai means "sea guppy,"
a fish similar in coloring to the petiole of this taro.
Distribution: Planted fairly extensively in Kona, Hawaii, primarily under
upland culture, but found only occasionally on the other islands.
Use: Mainly as table taro; the leaves are often used for luau.
Remarks: Although good poi can be made from this variety, it cannot be
stored as long as poi from other taros due to over-rapid fermentation.

GROUP MANINI

This group, named after the common striped fish 1nonini, is distin­
guished by green and reddish-purple or purplish-black striped petioles,
white corm flesh, and quite narrow, sagittate leaf blades. Formerly it
was grown quite extensively under wetland culture, particularly in
Wahiawa, Kauai, which was noted for its Manini taros. At present
the varieties are grown under upland culture in a few scattered locali­
ties for home consumption as table taro. Their popularity has declined
somewhat, possibly due to susceptibility to disease or to higher yields
of other varieties.

53. Manini Uliuli
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, slender, erect, maturing
in about 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; characterized by broad
purplish-black stripes on dark green petioles.
Petiole: 75 to 90 cm. long, dark green with broad purplish-black stripes
especially ncar base, with light pink to whitish edge, purplish-red at
apex, white at base with livid brown for 3 to 4 Clll. above.

54

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experiment Station

Leaf blade: 3S to 50 cm. long, 25 to 3S cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, dark green; margins slightly undulate;
pika purple; veins reddish on lower surface of lobes; lobes acute with
narrow smus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin yellowish with purple leaf scars.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; derives name from dark
striping of petioles.
Distribution: Limited; grown equally well under upland or wetland culture.
Use: Chiefly as table taro; makes poi of fair quality.
Remarks: The petiole stripes are less interrupted than in other striped vari­
eties and very broad, especially at base, often coalescing to form purplish­
black blotches.

54. Manini Kea
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, well spreading, maturing
in about 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished by very
light-colored petioles with indistinct reddish-purple stripes.
Petiole: 6S to 90 cm. long, shading from light green to yellowish-green toward
apex with a few indistinct, more or less interrupted reddish-purple stripes
more prominent toward base, conspicuously reddish-purple at apex, an
area of white for 3 to 5 cm. above base, with inconspicuous faint pink to
whitish edge.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 cm. long, 30 to 35 em. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, drooping, dark green with bluish cast;
pika purple; veins purple on lower surface of lobes; lobes acute with
narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white to cream-colored.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; probably called Kea because
of very light petioles.
Distribution: Planted in a few scattered localities, under upland or wetland
culture.
Use: Makes poi of good quality.
Remarks: This variety seems to be fairly resistant to soft rot. It is the
lightest in color of the striped taros, both basically and as to stri})es,
which are, strictly speaking, minute fleckings arranged in definite, nar­
row lines.

55. Manini Toretore
(~oretore)}torefore)

General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, slender, erect, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to S oha; differentiated by pro­
fuse purplish-black stripes on light green background.
Petiole: 7S to 100 cm. long, light green prominently striped with purplish­
black nearly throughout, the upper section suffused with reddish-purple
which runs into primary veins of basal lobes, reddish-purple at apex,
whitish at base, with indistinct whitish edge.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

55

Leaf blade: 40 to 55 cm. long, 35 to 45 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, inconspicuously mottled dark and light green with bluish
cast; pika large, prominent, purple; veins reddish-purple at margins and
on lower surfaces of lobes; lobes acute with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with conspicuous yellow fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle striped dark purple and light green; spathe about
28 cm. long, the lower tubular portion striped like peduncle with deep
purple at constriction, the upper portion yellow; spadix about 9 cm. long,
the staminate portion yellow, the sterile appendage orange, about 810m.
long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from South Seas; Taretare is
the name under which it was introduced but it has been classified under
the M anini group.
Distribution: Liitle-known variety of limited distribution.
Use: A fair table taro.

56. Papakolea-koae
(Papakolea)
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; the
brilliantly red-streaked apex of the petiole is distinctive.
Petiole: 60 to 80 cm. long, dark green brilliantly streaked with red at apex,
especially when young, a brilliant deep pink ring at base, the area above
red with a few broad green stripes, indistinctly pinkish at edge.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 cm. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, slightly concave, thin in texture, medium green; margins
slightly undulate; pika light green or tinged with red; veins brilliantly
reddish on lower surfaces of lobes; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yellowish
fibers; skin a brilliant pink, purple at leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Papokalea, being the name
of a land district, and kaae, meaning "the food of," probably indicates that
this variety was the common food of the district.
Distribution: Planted exclusively under upland culture in a few scattered
localities, chiefly in Kona and Puna, Hawaii.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.
Remarks: The red coloration near the base of the petioles is often so narrow
that it may not be noticed.

57. Ula
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; dis­
tinguished by a few narrow green stripes on the brilliant pink basal por­
tion of the petioles.
Petiole: 60 to 80 cm. long, rather rigid, nearly solid pink at base with narrow
green stripes, the upper half green, distinctly reddish-pink at edge, a
white ring at base.

S6

Bulletin 84, Ha'looii Experiment Station

Leaf blade: 40 to 55 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 30 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, thin in texture, medium green; margins slightly undulate;
pika yellowish-green to light green; lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with large, conspicuous, yellow fibers; skin white
to cream-colored.
Origin and derivation of name: Introduced from Samoa by Wilder, ula
means "red" in Samoan and probably refers to the brilliant pinkish-red
coloration of the petiole bases.
Distribution: Upland taro of limited distribution.
Use: A good table taro.
Remarks: The similarity between this variety and Papalwlea-lwae is rather
striking, further indicating the close relationship between certain Hawai­
ian and South Sea forms.

58. Nihopuu
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading,
maturing within 12 months, producing from S to 10 aha; identified by
light and dark green-striped petioles and distinct purplish-black edges.
PetiGle: 75 to 90 em. long, light and dark green-striped, the light green pre­
dominating, conspicuously purplish-black at edge, white to greenish-white
at base.
Leaf blade: 45 to 50 em. long, 30 to 35 em. wide, 35 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, indistinctly light and dark green-mottled; pika purple;
lobes acute with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety, collected at Ewa, Oahu;
the derivation of the name is unknown.
Distribution: Rare; formerly grown to considerable extent in valleys near
Schofield Barracks.
Use: Makes a light-colored poi of good quality.
Remarks: This variety is said to be susceptible to soft rot soon after matur­
ity, necessitating early harvesting.

59. Manini-opelu
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
9 to 12 months, producing from S to 10 alta; distinguished by profuse light
and dark green striping of the petiole, with reddish tinge on upper third.
Petiole: 6S to 90 em. long, distinctly and profusely dark and light green­
striped, strongly tinged with reddish-purple on upper third, white at base,
light pinkish at edge, curved slightly at apex.
Leaf blade: 4S to 55 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 40 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, drooping, inconspicuously light and dark
green-mottled; margins undulate; pika purple; veins reddish-purple on
lo~er surface; lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellow fibers; skin white to cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green- and white-striped with diffusion of reddish­
purple; spathe 28 to 32 em. long, the lower tubular portion 4 to 5 em.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

57

long, tightly convolute, green- and white-striped with conspicuous diffu­
sion of reddish-purple often nearly obscuring the striping, thc upper
portion tightly rolled, slightly open near constriction upon maturity,
yellow, oftcn drooping.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety, the first part of thc namc
is derived from the striping, and the second may be due to the coloring of
the petiole or to the use of the corm as fish bait.
Distribution: Planted in a few scattered localities, ncarly always under
upland culture.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.

60. Hinupuaa
(Manini)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, slender, moderately
spreading, maturing within 15 to 18 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha;
readily identified by profuse light and dark green petiole stripes and light
pinkish edge.
Petiole: 70 to 100 cm. long, light and dark green-striped throughout length
of petiole, the dark stripes predominating, slightly tinged with purple on
upper half, purplish at apex, white to greenish-white at base, light pinkish
at edge.
Leaf blade: 35 to 60 cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 30 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, slightly mottled dark and light green
with bluish cast; margins slightly undulate; pilw purple; lobes acute with
narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white to cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green- and white-striped; spathe about 24 cm. long,
the lower tubular portion 4 to 5 cm. long, green- and white-striped, the
upper yellow, tightly rolled or sometimes open near constriction; spadix
8 cm. long, the sterile appendage 7 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Hinllpuaa is literally
translatcd "pig grease," and may have referred to the glossy appearance
of the petiole or the slippery texture of the cooked corm.
Distribution: Limited; usually grown under upland culture.
Use: Mai nly as a table taro.

61. NiUe-uliuli
(Niue)
General characteristics: Medium in height to tall, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; quite similar
in coloring to Kai Ulillli except at the edge, which is narrow and reddish
instead of broad and whitish or yellowish.
Petiole: 75 to 105 cm. long, dark green slightly shaded with reddish-brown,
purplish at apex, reddish at edge, a brilliant dark pink ring at base with
light pink for 3 to 4 cm. above.

58

Bulletin 84, H a'Waii Experi1nent Station

Leaf blade: 45 to 55 COl. long, 30 to 40 COl. wide, 40 to 45 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, slightly concave, dark green with bluish cast; margins
with numerous fine undulations; pika and marginal veins reddish-purple;
lobes obtuse with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white tinged with pink, especially near apex, with yellowish
fibers; skin light pink.
Origin, and derivation of name: Introduced from Samoa by Wilder under
the name Niue (see also Nille-lIlallla, No. 51); the suffix uliuli given to
this variety refers to the dark green petioles which are slightly shaded
with reddish-brown.
Distribution: Little-known variety of limited distribution.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.

62. Ohe
General characteristics: Medium in height, wetl spreading, stocky, maturing
within 12 to 16 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; characterized by
light green petioles with light reddish-brown tinge on lower half.
Petiole: 60 to 80 cm. long, light green tinged with light reddish-brown on
lower half, with inconspicuous, narrow, reddish-brown edge, an orange­
red or dark pink ring at base with light greenish or pinkish area for 3 to
5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 20 to 30 cm. wide, 30 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, medium green; margins slightly undu­
late; pika whitish to light brownish; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yel­
lowish fibers; skin light pink.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Ohe is the Hawaiian name
for bamboo and probably refers to the similarity of the petiole coloring to
the stem coloring of a certain variety of Hawaiian bamboo.
Distribution: Very common in Kona, Puna, and Kau on Hawaii, primarily
under upland culture.
Use: Makes poi of excellent quality.
Remarks: This variety is an important upland poi taro, especially well
adapted to elevations above 1,500 feet.

GROUP LEHUA

This group is distinguished by light green, spreading petioles, very
smooth, sagittate leaf blades, and lilac-purple corms. The name LeIma
is derived from the flowers of the lehua tree, which are similar in color­
ing to the corm flesh. There are four varieties, all of which make red
poi of excellent quality. All red pois are called {(Lehua poi" for this
reason. They mature early, usually in from 8 to 12 months, and are
grown under both wetland and upland cultures. They are known as
royal taros and were formerly grown for and eaten only by the chiefs.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

S9

63. Lehua Maoli
(Lehua)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, slender, maturing
within 8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; identified by yellowish­
green, widely spreading petioles and light purplish-lilac corm flesh.
Petiole: 65 to 80 em. long, yellowish-green with pinkish cast, slightly tinged
with brownish-purple at apex, pinkish-lilac at edge, a dark reddish-purple
ring at base with light purplish-lilac for 3 to 5 em. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 em. long, 30 to 40 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, very smooth in outline, thin in texture, drooping,
medium green, often with pinkish tinge when young; pilla small, light
pinkish; lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh light purplish-1ilac with darker purplish fibers; skin dark
pinkish-lilac.
Inflorescence: Peduncle pale green with pinkish flush; spathe 14 to 20 em.
long, the lower tubular portion 2.5 to 3 em. long, olive green with pinkish
tinge, the upper portion deep yellow, open near constriction only upon
maturity; spadix 6 to 7 em. long, the sterile appendage 6 to 8 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; l/laoli means "the more com­
mon" or "ordinary." This variety is commonly known simply as "Le/lUa."
Distribution: A favorite variety of the Hawaiians, grown throughout the
islands under both upland and wetland cultnres. It is the most widely
.distributed of the upland poi taros and is planted extensively in Kana,
Hawaii.
Use: The widely advertised "Lchlla red poi," which often commands a pre­
mium in price, usually comes from this variety.

64. Lehua Keokeo
(Wm:akea)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha,. identified by pale green peti­
oles with broad, purplish-black edges.
Petiole: 70 to 90 em. long, pale green often tinged with reddish-brown at
apex, pinkish at base with a reddish-purple ring, the edge conspicuous,
broad, purplish-black with adjacent dark green blotches.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 em. long, 35 to 45 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, broadly sagittate, drooping, medium green with pinkish cast
when young; margins slightly undulate; pika pinkish; veins reddish on
lower surface; lobes acute with medium-cut sinus.
Corm: Flesh pale pinkish with purplish fibers; skin dark pinkish.
Origin, and derivation of name: An old native variety; the descriptive name
Keakea is derived from the pale coloring of the petiole.
Distribution: Grown in a few scattered localitie5, primarily under upland
culture.
Use: Makes red poi of good quality.

60

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experinu?1It Station

Remarks: This variety is reputed to make very luxuriant growth in certain
sections, rivaling the Lal£laa group.

65. Lehua Eleele
(Wo.11al10)
General characteristics: Medium in height to taft, slender, erect, maturing
within 8 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; distinguished by the
dark green petioles which are shaded with purple, especially near base
and along margins.
Petiole: 75 to 100 em. long, dark green with purplish shading especially near
base and along margins, purple at apex, with a narrow dark reddish to
purplish-black edge, a dark reddish-purple ring at base with lighter
reddish-purple for 3 to 5 em. above.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 em. long, 30 to 35 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, drooping, dark green; pika small, dark purplish; lobes
acute with deep, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh lilac-purple with darker reddish-purple fibers; skin brilliant
reddish-purple; roots light reddish-purple.
Orgin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Eleele is probably
given to this variety because it has much darker colored petioles than
other Lehua varieties, although the petioles are far from being blackish.
This variety is known as Wailalla in Kona, Hawaii.
Distribution: Planted quite extensively in Kona, Hawaii, usually under
upland culture, but practically none is grown elsewhere.
Use: Makes a very good red poi.
Remarks: This is an early-maturing taro of high yielding capacity. It must
be harvested as soon as it is mature as it rots readily if held in the field
for any length of time.

66. Lehua Palaii
(Palaii)
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, stiffly erect, slender,
maturing within 12 to 18 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished
by lilac-purple corm flesh and dark green petioles.
Petiole: 60 to 75 em. long, dark green slightly tinged with reddish-brown at
apex, a dark purple ring at base with light purplish-lilac for 3 to 4 em.
above, with a narrow, indistinct, reddish to whitish edge.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 em. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 30 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, drooping, dark green with faint pinkish cast; margins
slightly undulate; pika light green to faint brownish; lobes acute with
fairly deep, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh lilac-purple with darker purplish fibers; skin light pink.
Intlorescence: Peduncle dark green; spathe 18 to 23 em. long, the lower
tubular portion 3 to 4 em. long, dark green, the upper portion clear, deep
yellow, open near constriction only upon maturity; spadix 7 to 8 em. long,
the sterile appendage 5 to 8 mm. long.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

61

Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the derivation of the name
is unknown.
Distribution: Planted extensively in Kona, Hawaii, where it probably covers
a greater acreage than any other variety, principally under upland culture.
Use: An excellent upland poi taro.
Remarks: This variety is said to be quite hardy and a good yielder.

67. Apowale
General characteristics: Medium in height, stiffly erect, maturing within 9 to
12 months, producing from 2 to 5 oha; identified by dark green petioles
flecked with reddish-brown near basal portion.
Petiole: 60 to 90 cm. long, dark green flecked with reddish-brown on lower
portion, with an indistinct, narrow, reddish edge, pink at base.
Leaf blade: 40 to 6S cm. long, 30 to 50 cm. wide, 35 to 55 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, slightly crinkled, dark green; piko and
midrib whitish to light brownish; lobes obtuse with shallow, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially ncar apex, and yel­
lowish fibers; skin dark pink to purplish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; apowale means "to seize,"
and undoubtedly derives from the fact that the variety has a tough root sys­
tem and must be grasped firmly when pulled.
Distribution: Grown to a limited extent on Oahu, principally at Waialua,
usually under wetland culture.
Use: Chiefly as poi taro.

68. Wehiwa
(Wehewa, Wewehiwa)
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderately spreading, maturing
within 8 to 12 1110nths, producing from 5 to 10 olza; similar to Apowale
except that the flecking and color of base arc lighter and the petioles are
reddish at point of juncture with the leaf blade.
Petiole: 70 to 90 cm. long, dark green with dark purplish tinge on lower por­
·tion, flecked near base, light reddish-brown at apex, reddish-brown at
edge, a light pink ring at base.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 Cl~l. long, 30 to 40 C111. wide, 35 to 4S cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, somewhat concave, dark green; margins slightly undu­
late; pika light reddish-purple; lobes acute with llarrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin light to dark purple, the leaf
scars dark purple.
Inflorescence: Peduncle dark green with brownish flecking on lower part;
spathe 22 to 26 em. long, the lower tubular portion 3 to 3.5 em. long, dark
green with purple at base, the upper portion yellow; spadix about 10 cm.
long, the sterile appendage 8 to 9 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the derivation of the name
is unknown.

62

Bulletin 84, Hawaz:i Ex.perime1lt Station

Distribution: Little-known variety, found only occasionally around Hilo and
in Puna, Hawaii, under upland culture.
Use: Good for poi as well as for luau.
Remarks: Growers state that this variety can be held over in the fields for a
considerable period after maturity without serious loss from soft rot.

69. Papapueo
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 oha; the dark green
petiole with conspicuous, broad whitish edge is the chief distinguishing
character.
Petiole: 50 to 70 cm. long, dark green with conspicuous, broad whitish edge,
a brilliant dark pink ring at base with light pink for 3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 em. long, 25 to 40 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, drooping, dark green; margins slightly undulate; pilw
light green to light brownish; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with inconspicuous yellowish fibers; skin pale pink.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Papapul!o may indi­
cate that this is an old variety in Hawaii, papa meaning "ancient" and
/mea, "a land secti(;m."
Distribution: Grown to some extent on Maui, under wetland culture, but very
little elsewhere.
Use: Fair poi taro.

70. Kuoho
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderately spreadillg, m:lturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished by very
dark green petioles with indistinct, narrow pinkish edges.
Petiole: 65 to 80 cm. long, dark green with an indistinct, narrow pinkish
edge, a dark pink ring at base with light pinkish area for 1 to 3 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 30 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly sagittate, dark green; margins slightly undulate;
piko light yellowish; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially near apex, the fibers
yellowish; skin light pink, purplish along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; Iwoho means "fish hook,"
but the source of the name is unknown.
Distribution: A great favorite in Puna, Hawaii, but seldom seen elsewhere;
grown mainly under upland culture.
Use: Makes smooth, light-colored poi of good quality.

71. Leo
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderately spreading, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing from 2 to 5 oha; distillguished by some­
what crinkled leaf blades, whitish petiole bases, and yellowish-green
blotches adjacent to narrow, reddish petiole edges.

Taro Varieties in. Hawaii

63

Petiole: 65 to 80 ern. long, dark green with dark brown flecked shading on
lower portion, yellowish at apex, white at base, a narrow reddish edge
usually with adjacent yellowish-green blotches, especially near base.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 ern. long, 35 to 40 ern. wide, 30 to 40 ern. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, slightly crinkled, dark green; pika light green to yellow­
ish; veins conspicuous; lobes obtuse to slightly acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle green; spathe 15 to 17 ern. long, the lower tubular
portion 2.5 to 3 ern. long, green, the upper portion yellow; spadix 6 to 7
em. long, the sterile appendage 8 to 11 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; leo, meaning "influence aris­
ing from station, character, or reputation," indicates that this may have
been an important variety in the old days.
Distribution: Little is grown except for some plantings in Puna, Hawaii,
usually under upland culture.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.

72. Maea
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; characterized by dark green
petioles, whitish at base with reddish-brown flecks immediately above,
and conspicuous broad whitish edges.
Petiole: 60 to 80 ern. long, drooping, dark green flecked with reddish-brown,
the flecking most pronounced near base, with a conspicuous, broad whitish
edge, often tinged with reddish'-purpleadjacent to the edge, white at base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 em. long, 25 to 30 ern. wide, 30 to 40 ern. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly sagittate, dark green; pika yellowish; lobes acute with
wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin cream-colored, usually with
dark purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation' of name: Native variety; maea means "strong smell­
ing" or "pungent" in Hawaiian, and probably refers to the odor of the cooked
corms.
Distribution: Little-known variety, found occasionally under upland culture
in Puna, Hawaii.
Use: Mainly as a table taro.

73. Haokea
(HaalleGo, H aawikea, Ahakea)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, stocky, maturing within 9
to 12 months, producing from 10 to 15 aha; distinguished by the light self­
green petioles and narrowly ovate leaf blades.
Petiole: 65 to 90 em. long, light green with indistinct greenish edge, white
at base.
Leaf blade: 45 to 60 em. long, 35 to 50 em. wide, 35 to 45 em. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate, medium green; pika light yellowish-green; veins
rather conspicuous; lobes obtuse with wide sinus.

64

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experimellt Station

Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin white; roots conspicuously
white.
Inflorescence: Peduncle light green; spathe 26 to 37 cm. long, the lower
tubular portion 4 to 5 cm. long, light green with faint tinge of purple at
base, rather loosely rolled, the upper portion deep yellow, open near
constriction and loosely rolled above; spadix 8 to 11 cm. long, the sterile
appendage 9 to 14 mm. long, clearly constricted from staminate portion.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name is probably derived
from the firm white corm flesh.
Distribution: Quite common throughout the islands, under both wetland and
upland cultures.
Use: A commercial poi taro in certain areas on Oahu, making a good quality
poi of grayish color. The young leaves are comparatively nonacrid and
are used extensively for luau. Formerly, this taro was used as offerings
to the gods, the luau being highly prized by the kahuna. It was also used
quite widely for medicinal purposes.

74. Ka1alau
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, well spreading, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; identified by the light
self-green spreading petioles and sagittate leaf blades.
Petiole: 5S to 70 cm. tall, light green, inconspicuously greenish at edge, white
at base.
Leaf blade: 3S to 50 cm. long, 25 to 3S cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, medium green; margins slightly undulate; pika yel­
lowish; lobes acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yellowish fibers; skin whitish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; possibly named after Kala­
lau, a tableland on Mt. Waialeale, KauaL
Distribution: Planted, quite extensively on Maui, Molokai, and KauaL
Use: Not very important commercially as it is inclined to rot readily under
slightly adverse conditions. The luau is relatively nonacrid. Poi of good
quality may be made from this variety.

65

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNCLASSIFIED
VARIETIES

66

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNCLASSIFIED
VARIETIES

67

75. Hapuu
(Hapuupuu)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, maturing within about 12
months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; identified by the dark reddish-brown
to purplish-brown coloration on the lower half of the petioles with reddish­
flecked area at base.
Petiole: 60 to 80 cm. long, dark reddish-brown or purplish-brown on lower
half, sometimes lightly tinged with green, pinkish to whitish at edge, a
reddish-purple ring at base with lighter reddish-purple, flecked area for
3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 cm. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate; pika whitish to pinkish; lobes obtuse with shallow,
wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially near the apex, the
fibers yellowish; skin reddish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; hapllu means "abounding"
or "plenteous."
Distribution: Grown to a limited extent, under both upland and wetland
cultures; this is an important poi taro in a few scattered localities, the
vicinity near Hana, Maui having the most .extensive plantings.
Use: Makes a light-colored poi of good quality; the leaves are considered
very good for lllau.

76. Laaloa
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
8 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; characterized by white petiole
bases and reddish-brown shading on the lower half of the petioles.
Petiole: 65 to 90 em. long, reddish-brown shading to greenish on upper por­
tion, indistinctly brownish at edge, white at base.
Leaf blade: 40 to 50 cm. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, medium green; pilzo light yellowish-green; lobes obtuse
to slightly acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yellowish fibers; skin whitish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the derivation of the name
is unknown.
Distribution: Most C0l111110n on the island of Hawaii, chiefly under upland
culture; it thrives best in wet upland forests.
Use: Mainly as table taro.

77. Lauloa Uliuli
(Hinapu Lauloa H a Uliuli)
J

General characteristics: Tall, erect, stocky, maturing within 9 to 12 months,
producing from 5 to 10 aha; distinguished from other Lalllaa by dark green
petioles with dark brown tinge on lower portion.
Petiole: 100 to 140 em. long, dark green tinged with dark brown or reddish­
brown on lower portion only, pink to whitish at edge, a dark red ring at
base with light pink for 4 to 6 cm. above.

68

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experilltellt Station

Leaf blade: 4S to 6S cm. long, 30 to 40 cm. wide, 3S to 50 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, slightly concave, dark green; margins with a few large
undulations; pika small, light purplish; lobes obtuse with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with pinkish tinge, especially near apex, and yellowish
fibers; skin light pink, occasionally purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the descriptive name Ulillli
refers to the dark green petioles with brownish tinge.
Distribution: Found occasionally among other Lalllaa.
Use: Mainly as table taro.

78. Lihilihimolina
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, well spreading, produc­
ing a few aha; easily identified by the unusual coloring of the corm flesh­
lilac-purple in the center, surrounded by white. This is the only taro
having bicolored corm flesh.
Petiole: 55 to 70 cm. long, rather drooping, yellowish-green flecked with
reddish-brown near base, a faint, pale pink ring at base with white for
3 to 5 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 35 Clll. wide, 30 to 3S cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, thin in texture, smooth and regular in outline; lobes
acute with wide sinus.
Corm: Conspicuously lilac-purple at center and white outside; skin white
with purple along leaf-scar rings.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the derivation of the name is
unknown.
Distribution: Found only occasionally under upland culture on the island of
Hawaii.
Use: Primarily as a table taro.

79. Mana Eleele
(Polli Mana)
General characteristics: Medium in height, erect, maturing within 9 to 12
months, producing two or three branches; readily distinguished from
other Malia by blackish petioles.
Petiole: S5 to 85 cm. long, purplish-black, pink to whitish at edge, a dark
reddish-purple ring at base with lilac pink for 3 to 4 cm. above.
Leaf blade: 35 to 50 cm. long, 25 to 40 cm. wide, 30 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark green; veins purplish on lower surface; lobes acute
with shallow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white tinged with lilac ncar apex, with yellowish fibers; skin
dark purple.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the descriptive name Eleele
refers to the color of petioles.
Distribution: Limited, confined chiefly to the island of Hawaii; planted almost
exclusively under upland culture.
Use: Mainly as table taro for home consumption.
Remarks: This variety is said to be the most drought-resistant of the Hawaiian
taros.

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

69

80. Mana Okoa
General characteristics: Resembles Mana. Keokco except that petioles arc
decidedly lighter green and leaf blades are sagittate rather than ovate.
Petiole: 60 to 85 em. long, light green, pinkish-red at edge, white at base.
Leaf blade: 45 to 55 em. long, 30 to 35 cm. wide, 35 to 40 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, sagittate, medium green; margins undulate; pilw light greenish;
lobes acute with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with yellowish fibers; skin whitish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Probably native of Hawaii; as no name
could be ascertained it has been given the descriptive name of 01.-00,
meaning "another."
Distribution: Limited; occurs as a mixture in large plantings of /Ilana Keokeo.
Use: Fair table taro.

81. Moi
(Neenee)
General characteristics: Medium in height, well spreading, maturing within
9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; characterized by its light
green petioles with pinkish base.
Petiole: 60 to 85 cm. long, slender, drooping, light green, indistinctly whitish­
green at edge, a pink ring at base with lighter pink for 3 to 5 em. above.
Leaf blade: 40 to 55 em. long, 30 to 45 cm. wide, 30 to 45 em. frol11 tip to base
of sinus, narrowly ovate, thin in texture, medium green; piko whitish;
veins conspicuous, light green; lobes acute with shallow, wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially near apex, the fibers
yellow; skin pale pink.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; probably named after the
whitish Hawaiian fish, 1/Ioi.
Distribution: At the present time this variety is one of the lesser-known
taros but it is quite popular in certain districts, especially on Maui,
Molokai, and in Puna, Hawaii; grown pri"cipally under upland culture
but also does well under wetland culture.
Use: Good poi and table taro.

82. Oene
(Owene U[aula, Owene)
General characteristics: Short to medium in height, moderately spreading,
maturing within 9 to 12 months, producing from 6 to 15 aIm; distinguished
by the lilac-purple flecked petioles which are almost lacking in green and
fairly numerous aha.
Petiole: 60 to 75 cm. long, light lilac-purple flecked, almost lacking in green,
a dark pink ring at base with lighter pink for 3 to 5 em. above..
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 cm. long, 25 to 30 cm. wide, 25 to 35 cm. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark green; pilw purple; lobes obtuse with wide sinus.
Corm: Flesh white with light pinkish tinge, especially near apex; skin dark
pink.

70

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experi1nellt Station

Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the derivation of the name
is unknown.
Distribution: This variety is rare at the present time, being grown only by
a few Hawaiians who keep collections of Hawaiian varieties for a hobby.
It is a wild taro which used to grow fairly abundantly in open woodlands,
with little care, but was seldom raised under cultivation.
Use: Not used for food at the present time.
Remarks: This variety, having the smallest corm of all the taros, was used
only when other food supplies failed.

83. Pikoele
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderately spreading, maturing
within 9 to 12 months, producing from 5 to 10 aha; characterized by unusu­
ally large, prominent purple pika.
Petiole: 65 to 90 em. tall, dark green, red at edge, purplish at apex, white or
greenish-white at base.
Leaf blade: 45 to 50 em. long, 30 to 35 em. wide, 35 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, ovate, dark green; pika conspicuous, dark purple; lobes acute
with narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with conspicuous yellowish fibers; skin white to
cream-colored.
Inflorescence: Peduncle dark green; spathe 18 to 20 cm. long, the lower
tubular portion about 3 em. long, dark green, the upper portion yellow;
spadix 6.5 to 7 em. long, the sterile appendage about 9 mm. long.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; the name Pikaele refers to
the conspicuous, dark purple pika.
Distribution: Little-known variety of limited distribution.
Use: Mainly as table taro.
Remarks: Because of the similarity in names, this variety is sometimes con­
fused with Pika Eleele.

84. Pololu
General characteristics: Medium in height, moderat~ly spreading, maturing
within 12 to 15 months, producing from 2 to 5 aha; distinguished by the
white petiole bases and the light reddish-brown petioles, indistinctly
diffused with yellowish-green.
Petiole: 60 to 85 em. long, light reddish-brown indistinctly diffused with
yellowish-green, purplish at apex, indistinctly red at edge, white at base.
Leaf blade: 35 to 45 em. long, 25 to 35 em. wide, 25 to 40 em. from tip to base
of sinus, sagiftate, dark green with bluish cast; pika purple; lobes acute
with shallow, narrow sinus.
Corm: Flesh chalky white with yellowish fibers; skin whitish.
Origin, and derivation of name: Native variety; named, no doubt, after Pololu
Valley in the Kohala district of Hawaii.
Distribution: Grown to some extent in Kohala, Hawaii, under wetland cul­
ture, but seldom found elsewhere.
Use: A fairly good poi taro.

71

APPENDIX

72

73

APPENDIX
FINDING LISTS
PETIOLE COLORING
PRIMARILY RED

Niue-ulaula
Niuc-uliuli
Oene
Pololu

Akado
Hapuu
Kai Uliuli
Kakakura-ula '

Uahiape!e '
Ulaula Kumu
Ulaula Moano
Ulaula Poni

PRIMARILY BLACK

Lauloa Eleele-ula
Lauloa Palakca-eleele
Lauloa Palakca-papamu
Lauloa Palakea-ula
LeIma Eleele

Eleele Makoko
Eleele N aioea
Kumll-eleele
Laaloa
Lauloa Eleele-omao

Mana Eleele
Manini-owali '
Nawao
Piko Eleele

STRIPED

Akuugawai
Elcpaio
Hillllpuaa
Kakakura-ula '
Manini Kea
Manini-opclu

Manini-owali '
Manini Torctore
Manini Uliuli
NihoPllU
Oopukai
Papakolea-koae

Uahiapele'
Ula
Ulaula Moan01
Ulaula Poni '

PRIMARILY LIGHT TO MEDIUM GREEN

Lauloa Palakea-keokeo
Leima Keokeo
Lehua Maoli"
Lihilihimoli nas
Mana Kukuluhema s
Mana Okoa
Mana Opelll"
Mana Ulu"
Moi

APll
Apuwai
Aweu
Haokea
I1iuaua
KaiAla
Kai Kca"
Kalalall
Lauloa Kcokco"
1 Douhle-keye,1.
2 Suffused with

other colors.

8 Flecked with other colors.

Moana
Ohe"
Piko Kea
Piko Keokeo
Piko Lehua-apei
Tahitian
Tsurunoko'

74

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experi111,ellt Station
PRIMARILY DARK GREEN

Mana Keokeo
Mana Lauloa
Mana Uliuli 2
Mana Weo
Manapiko
Miyako'
Paakai

Apowale"
Bun-long!
Kuoho
Lauloa Uliuli
Lehua Palaii 2
Leo"
Maea'

Papapueo
Piialii'
Pikoele
Pika Uaua
Pika Ulaula'
Pika Uliuli
Wehiwa 8

CORM COLORING
FLESH PURPLE AT CENTER, WHITE OUTSIDE

Lihilihimolina
FLESH WHITE WITH PURPLE FIBERS

Bun-long
FLESH YELLOW

Mana Opelu
Mana Uliuli

Mana Ulu

Mana Weo

FLESH PURPLE

Eleele Makoko
Eleele Naioea
Leima Eleele
Leima Keokeo

Lehua Maoli
Lehua Palaii
Oopukai
Piialii

Piko Lehua-apei
Piko Ulaula

FLESH WHITE WITH YELLOW FIBERS; SKIN WHITE TO CREAM-COLORED

(Makes a gray poi unless otherwise indicated)
Akuugawai
Apu
Apuwai'
Aweu
Elepaio
Haokea'
Hinupuaa
KaiAla
Kakakura-ula
Kalalau
Laaloa
Lauloa Palakea-eleele
Lauloa Palakea-ula

Leo
Maea
Mana Keokeo
Mana Kukuluhcma
ManaOkoa
Manapiko
Manini Kea
Manini-opelu
Manini Toretore
Manini Uliuli
Miyaka
Moana
Nihopuu

• Suffused wi th other colors.
• Flecked with other colors.
• l\f akes a sil very poi.

Niue-ulaula
Paakai
Piko Keokeo
Piko Uaua
Piko Uliuli
Pikoele
Pololu
Tahitian
Tsurunoko
Uahiapele
Ula

Taro Varieties in Hawaii

75

FLESH WHITE WITH YELLOW FIBERS; SKIN PINKISH TO PURPLISH OR REDDISH

(Makes a gray poi unless otherwise indicated)
Akado
Apowale
Hapuu
I1iuaua
Kai Kea"
Kai Uliulio
Kumu-eleele
Kuoho
Lauloa Eleele-omao
Lauloa Eleele-ula
Lauloa Keokeo

Lauloa Palakea-keokeo
Lauloa Palakea-papamu
Lauloa Uliuli
Mana Eleele
Mana Lauloa
Mana Ulaula
Manini-owali
Moi
Nawao
Niue-uliuli
Oene

Ohe
Papakolea-koae
Papapueo
Piko Eleele
Piko Kca
Ulaula Kumu
Ulaula Moano
Ulaula Poni
Wehiwa

OTHER VEGETATIVE CHARACTERS
TALL PETIOLES

Akuugawai

Lauloa group
SHORT PETiOLES

Apu
Apuwai

Moana

Piialii

DIVERGENT PETIOLE SINUS

I1iuaua

Tsurunoko
CUP-SHAPED LEAF BLADES

Apu

Apuwai

Piialii

CRINKLED LEAP BLADES

Apowale
Apu
Apuwai

Leo
Moana
Paakai

Piialii
Piko Lehua-apei

SHAGGY CORM SKIN

Aweu
SINUS OP LEAP BLADE CUT TO PIKO

Piko group
" Makes a translucent amber poi.
• Makes a bluish poi.

76

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Bxperiment Station
BRANCHING PARENT CORMS

Mana group
RHIZOME~PRODUCING

Aweu

Kakakura-ula

MOTTLED LEAF BLADES

Elcpaio

Uahiapele

SPLOTCHED PIKO

Mana group

Manapiko

Tahitian

HABITAT OF VARIETIES
GROWN PRINCIPALLY UNDER UPLAND CULTURE

Akado
Akullgawai
Aweu
Eleele Makoko
Eleele N aioea
Elepaio
Hillupuaa
I1iuaua
Kakakura-ula
Kumu-eleele
Kuoho
Laaloa
Lauloa Eleele-omao
Lauloa Eleele-ula
Lauloa Keokeo
Lallloa Palakea-eleele
Lauloa Palakea-keokeo
Lauloa Palakea-papamu
Lauloa Palakea-ula

Lauloa Uliuli
Lehua Eleele
Lehua Keokeo
LellUa Palaii
Leo
Lihilihimolina
Maea
Mana Eleele
Mana Keokeo
Mana Kukuluhema
Mana Lauloa
ManaOkoa
Mana Opclu
Manapiko
Mana Ulaula
Mana Uliuli
Mana Ulu
Mana Weo
Manini-opelu

Manini Toretore
Miyako
Moalla
Nawao
Niue-ulaula
Niue-uliuli
Oene
Ohe
Oopukai
Paakai
Papakolea-koae
Pikoele
Tahitian
Tsurunoko
Ula
Ulal1la Moallo
Ulaula POlli
\Vehiwa

GROWN PRINCIPALLY UNDER \VETLAND CULTURE

Apowale
Apu
Apuwai
KaiAla
Kai Kea

KaiUliuli
Kalalal1
Nihopuu
Papapueo
Piialii

Piko Kea
PikoKeokeo
Piko Lehua-apei
Piko Uliuli
Pololu

77

Taro Val"ieties in Hawaii
GROWN UNDER BOTH UPLAND AND WETLAND CULTURES
Bun-long
Haokea
Hapuu
Leima Eleele
Leima Keokeo
Lehua Maoli

LeilUa Palaii
Manini Kea
Manini-owali
Manini Uliuli
Moi
Piko Eleele

Piko Uaua
Piko U1aula
Uahiapele
Ulaula Kumu

USAGE OF VARIETIES

POI TAROS
Apowale
Apuwai'
Eleele Makoko
Eleele Naioca'
Elepaio
Haokea'
Hapuu
Kai Ala'
Kai Kea'
Kai U1iuli'
Kalalau
Kuoho

Lauloa Eleele-ula
LeilUa Eleele
LeIma Keokeo
Leima Maoli'
LellUa Palaii'
Manini Kea
Moi
Nihopuu
Ohe'
Paakai
Papapueo
Piialii'

Piko Eleele
Piko Kea'
Piko Keokeo
Piko Lehua-apei
Piko Uaua'
Piko Ulaula
Piko Uliuli'
Pololu
Uahiapele
Ulaula KlItllu
Ulallia Moano
Wehiwa

LUAU TAROS
Apuwai'
Aweu
Bun-long'
Haokea
Hapuu

Kalalau
Lauloa group
Lauloa Palakea-eleele'
Mana group
Mana Keokeo'

Oopukai
Piko Eleele
Piko Lehua-apci
Wehiwa

KULOLO TAROS
Lauloa group

Mana group

Mana Keokco'

SPROUTS USED AS GREENS
Akado
Apuwai

Haokea
Lauloa group

Miyako
Tsurunoko

IMPORTANT TABLE TAROS8
Apuwai
Bun-long
Lauloa Keokeo
Lauloa Palakea-eleele

Mana Keokeo
Mana Ulu
Piko Eleele
Piko Kea

, Inclieates the most important varieties.
8 All varieties may be used as table taro~.

Piko Uliuli
Tsurunoko

78

Bulletin 84) Hawaii Experiment Station
EARLY~ OR LATE~ MATURING VARIETIES
EARLY~MATURING

Akado
Apu
Apuwai
Eleele Makoko
Eleele Naioea

KaiAla
Kai Kea
Kakakura-ula
Lehua Eleele
Lehua Keokeo

LeIma Maoli
Miyako
Oopukai
Piialii
Tsurunoko

LATE~MATURING

Hinupuaa
Ohe
Palaii

Piko Eleele
PikoKea
PikoKeokeo

Piko Uaua
Piko Ulaula
Piko U1iuli

79
ILLUSTRATED GLOSSARY OF BOTANICAL TERMS

vein
"""",,-4I-Piko

Midrib
Marginal vein

Petiole edqe

Sinus or groove

c

Corm fiber:;

Width

A

Lenq.h-b~se

of sinus to tip
Lenqth

D
-Sterile appendaqe
Upper tubular porl·ion

-Staminate portion

-Sterile portion
Constriction

Pislill21te podion

Lower tubular podion
, -Peduncle

E

F

80

81

GLOSSARY OF HAWAIIAN TERMS
ala. Fragrance; usually refers to the pleasant aroma emitted by the cooked
corms of certain varieties, notably the varieties belonging to the Kai
group.
apei. Crinkled.
apowale. To seize.
apu. Refers primarily to the cup, fashioned from a well-ripened coconut shell
cut longitudinally, used for drinking medicine and other unpleasant liquids
but not employed for ordinary drinking water.
ekaeka. Dirty reddish.
ele. Shortened or condensed form of eleele.
eleele. Dark-colored; black.
elepaio. A bird; flycatcher.
ha. Petiole.
hao. Cooked soft.
hinu. Smooth, glossy.
huH. Planting material consisting of a large central bud cut from the apex
of the corm, with about % to ~ inch of the corm attached to about 6 to 12
inches of the basal portion of the petiole.
ii. Rot.
iIi. Outer surface.
kahuna. A native priest, of whom there were several orders.
kai. Salt water; also the name of a group of taro varieties, possibly so named
because of tolerance to saline conditions.
kalalau. Wanderer; name of a valley on KauaL
kalo. A general term used to designate the whole taro plant; specifically it
refers to the parent corm. Kala and taro are merely dialectic variations
of the same word, the former being the original and authentic Hawaiian
name.
kea. Light-colored, not necessarily white.
keokeo. White or whitish, very light-colored.
kukuluhema. South point.
kulolo. A Hawaiian pudding prepared principally from grated raw taro and
coconut milk, steamed underground.
kumu. A brilliantly red-colored fish.
lau. Leaf, leaves.
lehua. Red or reddish; refers to the reddish poi made from certain varieties
of taro with lilac-purple corms; also the name of a group of taro varieties
noted for the excellent quality of reddish poi.
leo. Influence arising from station.
loa. Long, tall.
luau. Greens prepared from young, delicate inner leaves of the taro plant.
Since luau was an essential part of every native feast, the term luau has
come to be a designation for the feast itself.

82

Bulletin 84, Hawaii EXpe1'i1'l'wlIt Station

maea. Strong or bad smelling.
makoko. A reddish fish.
makua. Parent or older one; i.e., kalo-maklla or parent corm.
mana. Branching; also the name of a group of taro varieties characterized
by branching of the parent corm at the apex.
manini. A striped fish living in the coral reefs.
maoli. Native; genuine.
moana. Broad.
moano. A fish.
moi. A fish.
nawao. Wild taro; bad.
oha. Primary lateral corm lets or suckers produced from the parent corm.
obe. Hawaiian bamboo.
okoa. Different; another.
omao. Green.
oopukai. A fish.
opelu. A fish (mackerel).
owali. Weak.
owene. The first crop of taro.
paiai. (Pai, a bundle, and ai, food.) A round bundle of pounded taro done
up in ti leaves (Cord'ylille ter11linalis).
pake. Chinese.
pala. Soft; ripe, as fruit; mellow; cooked soft.
papa. Old; ancient.
pele. Goddess of the volcano.
piko. Navel; the upper surface of a leaf blade at the point of junction with
the petiole. Also the name of a group of taro varieties.
poi. Pasty mass made by pounding or grinding cooked taro corms, with suffi­
cient water added after thorough pounding to obtain the proper consist­
ency, and allowed to ferment for a shorter or longer time before it is
consumed.
poIoIu. Spear; a valley on Hawaii.
poni. Royal; purple.
puu. Secondary cormlets, too small to cook and not yet producing leaves.
uaua. Tough, elastic, viscid, glutinous, not easily separated.
ula. Shortened or condensed form of ulaula.
uIauia. Red, rosy, reddish.
uli. Shortened or condensed form of uliuli.
uliuli. A dark or dusky hue.
ulu. Breadfruit.
wai. \Vater.

83

LITERATURE CITED
1

BARRETT, O. W.

1910. Promising Root Crops for the SOl/th. I.-Yautias, Ta.ros alld
Dasheens. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry, Bull.
164, pp. 1-29, illus.
2

CHRISTOPHERSEN, ERLING

1935. Flowel'illg Plants of Samoa. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bull. 128,
221 pp., illus.

3

CRAWFORD, DAVID LIVINGSTON

1937. Hawaii's Crop Parade. Taro, pp. 267-270.
4

HAWAII AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION

1938. Anllual Report, 1937, pp. 17-18.

5

HILL, ALBERT F.

1939. The NOlllellcla.ture of the Taro alld Its Varieties. Harv. Univ. Bot.
Mus. Leafl. 7(7) : 113-118.
6

JONES, MARTHA R., LARSEN, NILS P., AND PRITCHARD, GEORI:E P.

1934. Taro and Sweet Potatoes Vel'slls Gmin Foods in Relation to
Health and Delltal Decay in Hawaii. Dental Cosmos 76 (4): 395-409.
illlls.

7

KIKUTA, K, WmTN12Y, LEO D., AND PARRIS, G. K.

1938. Seeds alld Seedlings of the Taro, Colocasia esclllenta. American
Journal of Botany 25 (3) : 186-188, illus.

8

MACCAUGIIEY, VAUGHAN, AND EMERSON, JOSEPH S.

1914. A Revised List of Hawaiian Varietal Names for Kala. The Hawai­
ian Forester and Agriculturist 11: 338-341.

9

MAGISTAD, O. C., AND FRAZIER, T. O.

1938. Production alld .Marleetillg of Truck Crops in the Territol"j' of
Hawaii. Hawaii Agr. Expt. Sta. Bull. 78, 46 pp., illlls.
10

MILLER, CAREY D.

1927. Food Values of Poi, Taro and Limll. Bernice P. Bishop Museum,
Bull. 37, 25 pp., illus.

84

85

INDEX
Variety
No.
Ahakea (See I-Iaokea)
73
Ahapii (See Piialii)
32
Akado
2
35
Akuugawai
Ala (See Kai Ala)
28
Ala Kea (See Kai Kea)
29
Ala Keokeo (See Kai Ala)
28
Ala Pipika (See :Mana Opelu)........ 9
Apowale
67
Apu
31
Apuwai
30
Araimo (See Tsurunoko).................. 1
6
Aweo (See Aweu)
Aweoweo (See Aweu)...................... 6
Aweu
6
Aweuwetl (See Aweu)
6
BUll-long
5
Bun-long-woo (See Bun-long)
5
Chinese (See Bun-long).................... 5
Ekacka (See Akado)
2
Eleele (See Eleele Naioea)
44
Eleele Lauloa
(See Lauloa Eleele-ula)
37
Eleele Makoko
43
Eleele Naioca
44
Elepaio
23
F orcfore (See Manini Toretorc)
55
Haakea (See I-Iaokea)
73
Haawikea (See Haokea)
73
I-Iaehae (See Piko UIiuIi)
21
Haehae Eleele (See Piko Eleele)
22
Hachae Keokeo (See Piko Keokeo) 19
Haehae UIaula (See Piko Ulaula) 17
Haokea
73
Hapuu
7S
Hapuupuu (See Hapuu)
75
Helcmauna (See Piko Eleele)
22
lIinapu (See Lauloa UliuIi)
77
Hinupuaa
60
Hiwa (See Uahiapele)
24
Iaia (See UIaula Moano)
50
Ieie (See Ulaula Moano)
50
I1iuaua
4
22
Ipuolono (See Piko Eleele)

Variety
No.
Kai Ala
28
Kai Eleele (See Kai Uliuli)
27
Kai Kea
29
Kaimoi (See Oopukai)
52
Kai Uliuli
27
Kakakura (See Kakakura-ula)
7
Kakakura-ula
7
Kalalau
74
Kumu (See Ulaula KUllJu)
48
Kumu-eleele
46
Kuoho
70
Laaloa
76
Lauloa Eleele
36
(See Lauloa Eleele-omao)
Lauloa Eleele-omao
36
Lauloa Eleele-ula
37
Lauloa Ha Eleele
36
(See Lauloa Eleele-omao)
Lauloa Ha Keokeo
(See Lauloa Keokeo)
42
Lauloa Ha UIiuli
(See Lauloa Uliuli)
77
Lauloa Keokeo
42
Lauloa Onionio
(See Lauloa Palakea-keokeo)
41
Lauloa Palakea
(See Lauloa Palakea-eleele)
38
Lauloa Palakea-eleele
38
Lauloa Palakea-keokeo
41
Lauloa Palakca-papamu
40
Lauloa Palakea-ula
39
Lauloa Paparnu
(See Lauloa Palakea-papamu)
40
Lauloa UIiuli
77
Launui Paakai (See Paakai)
33
Leima (See Lehua Maoli)
64
Lehua Apei (See Piko Lehua-apei) 16
Lehua Eleele
65
Lehua Keokeo
63
Lehua Maoli
64
Lehua Palaii
66
Leo
71
Lihilihimolina
78
Maea
72

86

Bulletin 84, Hawaii Experim.ent Station

Variety
Makaopio (See Piko Eleele)
Makoko (See Eleele Makoko)
Maauweo (See Aweu)
Mamauweo (See Aweu)
Mana Eleele
Mana Ha Ulaula
(See Mana Ulaula)
Mana Kea (See Mana Keokeo)
Mana Keokeo
Mana Kukuluhema
Mana Lauloa
Mana Okoa
Mana Opelu
l1ana Owene (See Mana Ulu)
Manapiko
Mana U1aula
Mana U1iuli
Mana Ulu
Mana Weo
Manini (See HinuJluaa)
Manini Kca
Manini-opclu
Manini-owali
Manini Toretore
Manini U1iuli
Manua (See Mana Kukuluhema)
Mauna (See Moana)
Miyako
Moana
110i

Moiula (See Piialii)
Mokohe (See Piialii)
Naioea (See Eleele Naioea)
Nawao
Neenee (See Moi)
Nihopuu
Niue (See
Niue-ulaula, Niue-uliuli)
Niue-ulaula
Niue-uliuli
Nohu (See Eleele Makoko)
Oapu (Sec Apu)
Oene
Ohe
Oopukai
Owene (See Oene)

No.
22
43
6
6

79
12
14
14
15
13
80
9
8
25
12
11
8
10
60
54
59
45
55
53
15
34
3
34
81
32
32
44
47
81
58

51, 61
51
61
43
31
82
62
52
82

Variety
No.
Owene Ulaula (See Oene)
82
Paakai
33
Pake (See I1iuaua)
4
Palaii (See Lehua Palaii)
66
Palakea (See Lauloa
Palakea-eleele)
38
Papakolea (See Papakolea-koae)
56
Papakolea-koae
56
Papapueo
69
Papamu
(See Lauloa Pa1akea-papamu)
40
Pau 0 Hiiaka (See Uahiapele)
24
Piialii
32
Pikoele
83
Piko Eleele
22
Piko Kea
18
Piko Keokeo
19
Piko Lehua-apei
16
Piko Uaua
20
Piko Ulaula
17
Piko Uli (Sec Piko Uliuli)
21
Piko Uliuli
21
Pololu
84
Poni Mana (See Mana Eleele)
79
Poni Ulau1a (See U1aula Poni)
49
Tahitian
26
Toretore (See Manini Toretore)
55
Tsurunoko
1
24
Uahiapele
Uaua Keokeo (See Piko Keokeo) .. 19
Uaua Piko (See Piko Uaua)
20
Ualehu (See Uahiapele)
24
Ula
57
UJaula Kumu
48
Ulaula Moano
50
U1aula Poni
49
Uwahiapcle (See Uahiapele)
24
Waiakea (See Lel1Ua Keokeo)
63
Waianae (See Piko Uliuli)
21
Wailana (See Lelllla Eleele)
65
Wehewa (See Wehiwa)
68
Wehiwa
68
Weo (See Mana Weo)
10
Wewehiwa (See Wehiwa)
68
Yellow (See Mana Uliuli)
11


